<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>

<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 SYSTEM "http://www.gutenberg.org/tei/marcello/0.4/dtd/pgtei.dtd" [

<!ENTITY u5  "http://www.tei-c.org/Lite/">

]>

<TEI.2 lang="en">
<teiHeader>
  <fileDesc>
    <titleStmt>
      <title>Fresh Light from the Ancient Monuments</title>
      <author><name reg="Sayce, Archibald Henry">Archibald Henry Sayce</name></author>
    </titleStmt>
    <editionStmt>
      <edition n="2">Edition 2</edition>
    </editionStmt>
    <publicationStmt>
      <publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher>
      <date>June 18, 2010</date>
      <idno type="etext-no">32883</idno>
      <availability>
        <p>This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and
        with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it
        away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg
        License online at www.gutenberg.org/license</p>
      </availability>
    </publicationStmt>
    <sourceDesc>
      <bibl>
        Created electronically.
      </bibl>
    </sourceDesc>
  </fileDesc>
  <encodingDesc>
  </encodingDesc>
  <profileDesc>
    <langUsage>
      <language id="en"></language>
      <language id="he"></language>
      <language id="el"></language>
    </langUsage>
  </profileDesc>
  <revisionDesc>
    <change>
      <date value="2010-06-18">June 18, 2010</date>
      <respStmt>
        <name>
            Produced by Bryan Ness, David King, and the Online
            Distributed Proofreading Team at &lt;http://www.pgdp.net/&gt;.
            (This book was produced from scanned images of public
            domain material from the Google Print project.)
        </name>
      </respStmt>
      <item>Project Gutenberg TEI edition 1</item>
    </change>
  </revisionDesc>
</teiHeader>

<pgExtensions>
  <pgStyleSheet>
    .boxed           { x-class: boxed }
    .shaded          { x-class: shaded }
    .rules           { x-class: rules; rules: all }
    .indent          { margin-left: 2 }
    .bold            { font-weight: bold }
    .italic          { font-style: italic }
    .smallcaps       { font-variant: small-caps }
  </pgStyleSheet>

  <pgCharMap formats="txt.iso-8859-1">
    <char id="U0x2014">
      <charName>mdash</charName>
      <desc>EM DASH</desc>
      <mapping>--</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2003">
      <charName>emsp</charName>
      <desc>EM SPACE</desc>
      <mapping>  </mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2026">
      <charName>hellip</charName>
      <desc>HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS</desc>
      <mapping>...</mapping>
    </char>
  </pgCharMap>
</pgExtensions>

<text lang="en">
  <front>
    <div>
      <divGen type="pgheader" />
    </div>
    <div>
      <divGen type="encodingDesc" />
    </div>

    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">Fresh Light from the Ancient Monuments</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">A Sketch of the Most Striking Confirmations of the Bible, From Recent Discoveries in:</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Egypt. Palestine. Assyria. Babylonia. Asia Minor.</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">by</p>
      <p rend="font-size: x-large; text-align: center">Archibald Henry Sayce, M.A.</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Deputy Professor of Comparative Philology, Oxford.</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Hon. LL.D., Dublin.</p>
      <p rend="font-size: x-large; text-align: center">Second Edition.</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">London:</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">The Religious Tract Society.</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">36, Paternoster Row; 65, St. Paul's Churchyard.</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">1884</p>
    </div>
    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <head>Contents</head>
      <divGen type="toc" />
    </div>

  </front>
<body>

<pb n='001'/><anchor id='Pg001'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Preface.</head>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/frontispiece.png' rend='width: 50%'>
    <head>Monument of a Hittite king, accompanied by an inscription in Hittite
hieroglyphics, discovered on the site of Carchemish and now in the British
Museum.</head>
    <figDesc>Illustration.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
The object of this little book is explained by its title.
Discovery after discovery has been pouring in upon us
from Oriental lands, and the accounts given only ten
years ago of the results of Oriental research are already
beginning to be antiquated. It is useful, therefore, to
take stock of our present knowledge, and to see how far
it bears out that <q>old story</q> which has been familiar to us
from our childhood. The same spirit of scepticism which
had rejected the early legends of Greece and Rome had
laid its hands also on the Old Testament, and had
determined that the sacred histories themselves were
but a collection of myths and fables. But suddenly, as
with the wand of a magician, the ancient eastern world
has been reawakened to life by the spade of the explorer
and the patient skill of the decipherer, and we now find
ourselves in the presence of monuments which bear the
names or recount the deeds of the heroes of Scripture.
One by one these <q>stones crying out</q> have been examined
or more perfectly explained, while others of
equal importance are being continually added to them.
</p>

<pb n='002'/><anchor id='Pg002'/>

<p>
What striking confirmations of the Bible narrative
have been afforded by the latest discoveries will be seen
from the following pages. In many cases confirmation
has been accompanied by illustration. Unexpected
light has been thrown upon facts and statements
hitherto obscure, or a wholly new explanation has been
given of some event recorded by the inspired writer.
What can be more startling than the discovery of the great
Hittite Empire, the very existence of which had been
forgotten, and which yet once contended on equal terms
with Egypt on the one side and Assyria on the other?
The allusions to the Hittites in the Old Testament,
which had been doubted by a sceptical criticism, have
been shown to be fully in accordance with the facts, and
their true place in history has been pointed out.
</p>

<p>
But the account of the Hittite Empire is not the only
discovery of the last four or five years about which this
book has to speak. Inscriptions of Sargon have cleared
up the difficulties attending the tenth and eleventh
chapters of Isaiah's prophecies, and have proved that no
<q>ideal</q> campaign of an <q>ideal</q> Assyrian king is
described in them. The campaign, on the contrary, was
a very real one, and when Isaiah delivered his prophecy
the Assyrian monarch was marching down upon Jerusalem
from the north, and was about to be <q>the rod</q> of
God's anger upon its sins. Ten years before the overthrow
of Sennacherib's army his father, Sargon, had
<pb n='003'/><anchor id='Pg003'/>
captured Jerusalem, but a <q>remnant</q> escaped the
horrors of the siege, and returned in penitence <q>unto
the mighty God.</q>
</p>

<p>
Perhaps the most remarkable of recent discoveries is
that which relates to Cyrus and his conquest of Babylonia.
The history of the conquest as told by Cyrus
himself is now in our hands, and it has obliged us to
modify many of the views, really derived from Greek
authors, which we had read into the words of Scripture.
Cyrus, we know now upon his own authority, was a
polytheist, and not a Zoroastrian; he was king of Elam,
not of Persia. It was Elam, and not Persia, as Isaiah's
prophecies declared, which invaded Babylon. Babylon
itself was taken without a siege, and Mr. Bosanquet may
therefore have been right in holding that the Darius of
Daniel was Darius the son of Hystaspes.
</p>

<p>
Hardly less interesting has been the discovery of the
inscription of Siloam, which reveals to us the very
characters used by the Jews in the time of Isaiah,
perhaps even in the time of Solomon himself. The
discovery has cast a flood of light on the early topography
of Jerusalem, and has made it clear as the
daylight that the Jews of the royal period were not the
rude and barbarous people it has been the fashion of an
unbelieving criticism to assume, but a cultured and
literary population. Books must have been as plentiful
among them as they were in Phœnicia or Assyria; nor
<pb n='004'/><anchor id='Pg004'/>
must we forget the results of the excavations undertaken
last year in the land of Goshen. Pithom, the
treasure-city built by the Israelites, has been disinterred,
and the date of the Exodus has been fixed. M. Naville
has even found there bricks made without straw.
</p>

<p>
But the old records of Egypt and Assyria have a
further interest than a merely historical one. They tell
us what were the religious doctrines and aspirations of
those who composed them, and what was their conception
of their duty towards God and man. We have only
to compare the hymns and psalms and prayers of these
ancient peoples&mdash;seeking <q>the Lord, if haply they might
feel after Him and find Him</q>&mdash;with the fuller lights
revealed in the pages of the Old Testament, to discover
how wide was the chasm that lay between the two.
The one was seeking what the other had already found.
The Hebrew prophet was the forerunner and herald of
the Gospel, and the light shed by the Gospel had been
reflected back upon him. He saw already <q>the Sun of
Righteousness</q> rising in the east; the psalmist of
Shinar or the devout worshipper of Asshur were like
unto those <q>upon whom no day has dawned.</q>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='009'/><anchor id='Pg009'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter I. Introduction.</head>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>How the Cuneiform Inscriptions were deciphered.&mdash;Grotefend's
guess.&mdash;Lassen and Rawlinson's studies.&mdash;Discoveries of Botta, Layard, George
Smith, and Rassam.&mdash;Certainty of our present knowledge.</hi>
</quote>

<p>
The decipherment of the cuneiform or wedge-shaped
inscriptions of Assyria has been one of the most marvellous
achievements of the present century. It has often
been asked how Assyrian scholars have been enabled to
read an Assyrian text with almost as much certainty as a
page of the Old Testament, although both the language
and the characters in which it is written were utterly
unknown but a few years ago. A brief history of the
origin and progress of the decipherment will best answer
the question.
</p>

<p>
Travellers had discovered inscriptions engraved in
cuneiform, or, as they were also termed, arrow-headed,
characters on the ruined monuments of Persepolis and
other ancient sites in Persia. Some of these monuments
were known to have been erected by the Achæmenian
princes&mdash;Darius, the son of Hystaspes, and his successors&mdash;and
it was therefore inferred that the inscriptions
also had been carved by order of the same kings. The
inscriptions were in three different systems of cuneiform
writing; and, since the three kinds of inscription were
always placed side by side, it was evident that they
<pb n='010'/><anchor id='Pg010'/>
represented different versions of the same text. The
subjects of the Persian kings belonged to more than one
race, and just as in the present day a Turkish pasha in
the East has to publish an edict in Turkish, Arabic,
and Persian, if it is to be understood by all the populations
under his charge, so the Persian kings were obliged
to use the language and system of writing peculiar to
each of the nations they governed, whenever they wished
their proclamations to be read and understood by them.
</p>

<p>
It was clear that the three versions of the Achæmenian
inscriptions were addressed to the three chief populations
of the Persian Empire, and that the one which
invariably came first was composed in ancient Persian,
the language of the sovereign himself. Now this
Persian version happened to offer the decipherer less
difficulties than the two others which accompanied
it. The number of distinct characters employed in
writing it did not exceed forty, while the words were
divided from one another by a slanting wedge. Some
of the words contained so many characters that it was
plain that these latter must denote letters, and not
syllables, and that consequently the Persian cuneiform
system must have consisted of an alphabet, and not of a
syllabary. It was further plain that the inscriptions had
to be read from left to right, since the ends of all the
lines were exactly underneath one another on the left
side, whereas they terminated irregularly on the right;
indeed, the last line sometimes ended at a considerable
distance from the right-hand extremity of the inscription.
</p>

<p>
The clue to the decipherment of the inscriptions was
first discovered by the successful guess of a German
scholar, Grotefend. Grotefend noticed that the inscriptions
generally began with three or four words, one of
<pb n='011'/><anchor id='Pg011'/>
which varied, while the others remained unchanged.
The variable word had three forms, though the same
form always appeared on the same monument. Grotefend,
therefore, conjectured that this word represented
the name of a king, the words which followed it being
the royal titles. One of the supposed names appeared
much oftener than the others, and as it was too short for
Artaxerxes and too long for Cyrus, it was evident that
it must stand either for Darius or for Xerxes. A study
of the classical authors showed Grotefend that certain
of the monuments on which it was found had been constructed
by Darius, and he accordingly gave to the
characters composing it the values required for spelling
"Darius" in its old Persian form. In this way he succeeded
in obtaining conjectural values for six cuneiform
letters. He now turned to the second royal name, which
also appeared on several monuments, and was of much
the same length as that of Darius. This could only be
Xerxes; but if so, the fifth letter composing it (<hi rend='italic'>r</hi>) would
necessarily be the same as the third letter in the name of
Darius. This proved to be the case, and thus afforded
the best possible evidence that the German scholar was
on the right track.
</p>

<p>
The third name, which was much longer than the
other two, differed from the second chiefly at the beginning,
the latter part of it resembling the name of Xerxes.
Clearly, therefore, it could be nothing else than Artaxerxes,
and that it actually was so, was rendered certain
by the fact that the second character composing it was
that which had the value of <hi rend='italic'>r</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Grotefend now possessed a small alphabet, and with
this he proceeded to read the word which always followed
the royal name, and therefore probably meant <q>king.</q>
<pb n='012'/><anchor id='Pg012'/>
He found that it closely resembled the word which signified
<q>king</q> in Zend, the old language of the Eastern
Persians, which was spoken in one part of Persia at
the same time that Old Persian, the language of the
Achæmenian princes, was spoken in another. There
could, consequently, be no further room for doubt that he
had really solved the great problem, and discovered
the key to the decipherment of the cuneiform texts.
</p>

<p>
But he did little further himself towards the completion
of the work, and it was many years before any real
progress was made with it. Meanwhile, the study of
Zend had made great advances, more especially in the
hands of Burnouf, who eventually turned his attention to
the cuneiform inscriptions. But it is to Burnouf's pupil,
Lassen, as well as to Sir Henry Rawlinson, that the
decipherment of these inscriptions owes its final completion.
The discovery of the list of Persian satrapies in
the inscription of Darius at Naksh-i-Rustem, and above
all the copy of the long inscription of Darius on the rock
of Behistun, made by Sir H. Rawlinson, enabled these
scholars independently of one another to construct an
alphabet which differed only in the value assigned to a
single character, and, with the help of the cognate Zend
and Sanskrit, to translate the language so curiously
brought to light. The decipherment of the Persian
cuneiform texts thus became an accomplished fact;
what was next needed was to decipher the two
versions which were inscribed at their side.
</p>

<p>
But this was no easy task. The words in them were
not divided from one another, and the characters of
which they were composed were exceedingly numerous.
With the assistance, however, of frequently recurring
proper names even these two versions gradually yielded
<pb n='013'/><anchor id='Pg013'/>
to the patient skill of the decipherer; and it was then
discovered that while one of them represented an agglutinative
language, such as that of the Turks or Fins,
the other was in a dialect which closely resembled the
Hebrew of the Old Testament. The monuments found
almost immediately afterwards in Assyria and Babylonia
by Botta and Layard soon made it clear to what people
this dialect must have belonged. The inscriptions of
Nineveh turned out to be written in the same language
and form of cuneiform script; and it must therefore have
been for the Semitic population of Assyria and Babylonia
that the kings of Persia had caused one of the versions
of their inscriptions to be drawn up. This version served
as a starting-point for the decipherment of the texts
which the excavations in Assyria had brought to light.
</p>

<p>
It might have been thought that the further course of
the decipherment would have presented little difficulty,
now that the values of many of the Assyrian characters
were known, and the close resemblance of the language
they concealed to Hebrew had been discovered. But
the complicated nature of the Assyrian system of
cuneiform&mdash;the great number of characters used in it,
the different phonetic values the same character might
have, and the frequent employment of ideographs, which
denoted ideas and not sounds&mdash;caused the progress of
decipherment to be for some time but slow. Indeed, had
the Assyrian inscriptions been confined to those engraved
on the alabaster bulls and other monuments of Nineveh,
our knowledge of the language would always have
remained comparatively limited. But, fortunately, the
Assyrians, like the Babylonians before them, employed
clay as a writing material, and established libraries,
which were filled with a literature on baked bricks.
</p>

<pb n='014'/><anchor id='Pg014'/>

<p>
One of the most important results of Sir A. H. Layard's
explorations at Nineveh was the discovery of the ruined
library of the ancient city, now buried under the mounds
of Kouyunjik. The broken clay tablets belonging to
this library not only furnished the student with an
immense mass of literary matter, but also with direct
aids towards a knowledge of the Assyrian syllabary and
language. Among the literature represented in the
library of Kouyunjik were lists of characters, with their
various phonetic and ideographic meanings, tables of
synonymes, and catalogues of the names of plants and
animals. This, however, was not all. The inventors of
the cuneiform system of writing had been a people who
preceded the Semites in the occupation of Babylonia,
and who spoke an agglutinative language utterly
different from that of their Semitic successors. These
Accadians, as they are usually termed, left behind them
a considerable amount of literature, which was highly
prized by the Semitic Babylonians and Assyrians. A
large portion of the Ninevite tablets, accordingly,
consists of interlinear or parallel translations from
Accadian into Assyrian, as well as of reading books,
dictionaries, and grammars, in which the Accadian
original is placed by the side of its Assyrian equivalent.
It frequently happens that the signification of a
previously unknown Assyrian word can be ascertained
by our finding it given as the rendering of an Accadian
word, with the meaning of which we are already
acquainted. The bilingual texts have not only enabled
scholars to recover the long-forgotten Accadian
language; they have also been of the greatest possible
assistance to them in their reconstruction of the Assyrian
dictionary itself.
</p>

<pb n='015'/><anchor id='Pg015'/>

<p>
The three expeditions conducted by Mr. George
Smith, as well as the later ones of Mr. Hormuzd
Rassam, have added largely to the stock of tablets from
Kouyunjik originally acquired for the British Museum
by Sir A. H. Layard, and have also brought to light
a few other tablets from the libraries of Babylonia.
Although, therefore, only one of the many libraries
which now lie buried beneath the ground in Babylonia
and Assyria has, as yet, been at all adequately explored,
the amount of Assyrian literature at the disposal of the
student is already greater than that contained in the
whole of the Old Testament. Apart from the help
afforded by the old dictionaries and lists of words and
characters, he has more facilities for determining the
meaning of a word by a comparison of parallel
passages than the student of Biblical Hebrew; and in
many instances, accordingly, Assyrian has made it
possible to fix the signification of a Hebrew word, the
sense of which has hitherto been doubtful.
</p>

<p>
The Assyrian student, moreover, possesses an advantage
which is not shared by the Hebraist. Owing to its
hieroglyphic origin, the cuneiform system of writing
makes large use of what are called determinatives, that
is to say, of characters which have no phonetic value,
but which determine the class to which the word they
accompany belongs. It is, therefore, always possible to
tell at a glance whether the word with which we are
dealing is the name of a man, of a woman, of a deity, of
a river, of a country, or of a city; or, again, whether it
denotes an animal, a bird, a vegetable, a stone, a star, a
medicine, or the like. With all these aids, accordingly,
it is not wonderful that the study of Assyrian has made
immense progress during the last few years, and that an
<pb n='016'/><anchor id='Pg016'/>
ordinary historical text can be read with as much certainty
as a page from one of the historical books of the
Old Testament. Indeed, we may say that it can be read
with even greater certainty, since it presents us with the
actual words of the original writer; whereas the text of
the Old Testament has come to us through the hands of
successive generations of copyists, who have corrupted
many passages so as to make them grammatically unintelligible.
</p>

<p>
At the same time, the hieroglyphic origin of the
cuneiform mode of writing has been productive of disadvantages
as well as of advantages. The characters
which compose it may express ideas as well as sounds;
and though we may know what ideas are represented,
we may not always know the exact pronunciation to be
assigned to them. Thus, in English, the ideograph +
may be pronounced <q>plus,</q> <q>added to,</q> or <q>more,</q>
according to the pleasure of the reader. The Assyrian
scribes usually attached one or more phonetic characters
to the ideographs they employed, in order to indicate
their pronunciation in a given passage; but these <q>phonetic
complements,</q> as they are termed, were frequently
omitted in the case of well-known proper names, such as
those of the native kings and deities. Hence the exact
pronunciation of these names can only be settled when
we find them written phonetically; and there are one
or two proper names, such as that of the hero of the
great Chaldean epic, which have never yet been met
with phonetically spelt.
</p>

<p>
Another disadvantage due to the hieroglyphic origin
of the Assyrian syllabary is the number of different phonetic
values the same character may bear. This caused
a good deal of trouble in the early days of Assyrian
<pb n='017'/><anchor id='Pg017'/>
decipherment; but it was a difficulty that was felt quite
as much by the Assyrians themselves as it is by us.
Consequently they adopted various devices for overcoming
it; and as these devices have become known the
difficulty has ceased to be felt. In short, the study of
Assyrian now reposes on as sure and certain a basis as
the study of any ancient language, a knowledge of which
has been traditionally handed down to us; and the
antiquity of its monuments, the copiousness of its vocabulary,
the perfection of its grammar, and the syllabic
character of the writing&mdash;which expresses vowels as well
as consonants&mdash;all combine to make it of the highest
importance for the study of the Semitic languages.
Its recovery has not only shed a flood of light on the
history and antiquities of the Old Testament, it has
served to illustrate and explain the language of the Old
Testament as well.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='018'/><anchor id='Pg018'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter II. The Book of Genesis.</head>

<quote rend='display'>
Recent discoveries, especially in Babylonia and Assyria, have thrown much
light on Genesis.&mdash;The Accadians.&mdash;An Assyrian account of the
Creation.&mdash;The Babylonian Sabbath.&mdash;Traces of an account of the Fall.&mdash;Site
of Paradise.&mdash;<q>Adam</q> a Babylonian word.&mdash;The Chaldean
story of the Deluge.&mdash;This compared with the record in Genesis.&mdash;The
Babylonian account of the building of Babel.&mdash;The light thrown by the
Assyrian inscriptions on the names in Gen. x.&mdash;Gomer; Madai; Javan;
Cush and Mizraim; Phut; Canaan; Elam; Asshur; Arphaxad;
Aram; Lud; Nimrod.&mdash;The site of Ur.&mdash;Approximate date of the
rescue of Lot by Abraham.&mdash;Egypt in the time of Abraham.&mdash;Records of
famines.&mdash;The date of Joseph's appointment as second ruler in Egypt.&mdash;The
Tale of the Two Brothers.&mdash;Goshen.
</quote>

<p>
There is no book in the world about which more has
been written than the Bible, and perhaps there is no
portion of the Bible which has given rise to a larger
literature than the Book of Genesis. Every word in it
has been carefully scrutinised, now by scholars who
sought to discover its deepest meaning or to defend it
against the attacks of adversaries, now again by hostile
critics anxious to expose every supposed flaw, and to
convict it of error and inconsistency. Assailants and
defenders had long to content themselves with such
evidence as could be derived from a study of the book
itself, or from the doubtful traditions of ancient nations,
as reported by the writers of Greece and Rome. Such
reports were alike imperfect and untrustworthy; historical
criticism was still in its infancy in the age of the
classical authors, and they cared but little to describe
<pb n='019'/><anchor id='Pg019'/>
accurately the traditions of races whom they despised.
It was even a question whether any credit could be
given to the fragments of Egyptian, Babylonian, and
Phœnician mythology or history extracted by Christian
apologists from the lost works of native authors who
wrote in Greek. The Egyptian dynasties of Manetho,
the Babylonian stories of the Creation and Flood narrated
by Berossus, the self-contradicting Phœnician
legends collected by Philo Byblius, were all more or
less suspected of being an invention of a later age.
The earlier chapters of Genesis stood almost alone;
friends and foes alike felt the danger of resting any
argument on the apparent similarity of the accounts
recorded in them to the myths and legends contained
in the fragments of Manetho, of Berossus, and of Philo
Byblius.
</p>

<p>
All is changed now. The marvellous discoveries of
the last half-century have thrown a flood of light on the
ancient oriental world, and some of this light has necessarily
been reflected on the Book of Genesis. The
monuments of Egypt, of Babylonia, and of Assyria have
been rescued from their hiding-places, and the writing
upon them has been made to speak once more in living
words. A dead world has been called again to life by
the spade of the excavator and the patient labour of the
decipherer. We find ourselves, as it were, face to face
with Sennacherib, with Nebuchadnezzar, and with
Cyrus, with those whose names have been familiar to us
from childhood, but who have hitherto been to us mere
names, mere shadowy occupants of an unreal world.
Thanks to the research of the last half-century, we can
now penetrate into the details of their daily life, can
examine their religious ideas, can listen to them as they
<pb n='020'/><anchor id='Pg020'/>
themselves recount the events of their own time or the
traditions of the past which had been handed down to
them.
</p>

<p>
It is more especially in Babylonia and Assyria that
we find illustrations of the earlier chapters of Genesis,
as, indeed, is only natural. The Semitic language
spoken in these two countries was closely allied to that
of the Old Testament, as closely, in fact, as two modern
English dialects are allied to each other; and it was
from Babylonia, from Ur of the Chaldees, now represented
by the mounds of Mugheir, that Abraham made
his way to the future home of his descendants in the
west. It is to Babylonia that the Biblical accounts of
the Fall, of the Deluge, and of the Confusion of
Tongues particularly look: two of the rivers of Paradise
were the Tigris and Euphrates, the ark rested on the
mountains of Ararat, and the city built around the
Tower which men designed should reach to heaven was
Babel or Babylon. Babylonia was an older kingdom
than Assyria, which took its name from the city of
Assur, now Kalah Sherghat, on the Tigris, the original
capital of the country. It was divided into two halves,
Accad (Gen. x. 10) being Northern Babylonia, and
Sumir, the Shinar of the Old Testament, Southern
Babylonia. The primitive populations of both Sumir
and Accad were related, not to the Semitic race, but to
the tribes which continued to maintain themselves in the
mountains of Elam down to a late day. They spoke
two cognate dialects, which were agglutinative in character,
like the languages of the modern Turks and Fins;
that is to say, the relations of grammar were expressed
by coupling words together, each of which retained an
independent meaning of its own. Thus
<foreign rend='italic'>in-nin-sun</foreign> is
<pb n='021'/><anchor id='Pg021'/>
<q>he gave it,</q> literally <q>he-it-gave,</q>
<foreign rend='italic'>e-mes-na</foreign> is <q>of
houses,</q> literally <q>house-many-of.</q> At an early date,
which cannot yet, however, be exactly determined, the
Sumirians and Accadians were overrun and conquered
by the Semitic Babylonians of later history, Accad
being apparently the first half of the country to fall
under the sway of the new-comers. It is possible that
Casdim, the Hebrew word translated <q>Chaldees</q> or
<q>Chaldæans</q> in the Authorised Version, is the Babylonian
<foreign rend='italic'>casidi</foreign>, or <q>conquerors,</q> a title which continued
to cling to them in consequence of their conquest.
</p>

<p>
The Accadians had been the inventors of the pictorial
hieroglyphics which afterwards developed into the
cuneiform or wedge-shaped system of writing; they
had founded the great cities of Chaldea, and had
attained to a high degree of culture and civilisation.
Their cities possessed libraries, stocked with books,
written partly on papyrus, partly on clay, which was,
while still soft, impressed with characters by means of
a metal stylus. The books were numerous, and related
to a variety of subjects. Among them there were more
particularly two to which a special degree of sanctity
was attached. One of these contained magical formulæ
for warding off the assaults of evil spirits; the other
was a collection of hymns to the gods, which was used
by the priests as a kind of prayer-book. When the
Semitic Babylonians, the kinsmen of the Hebrews, the
Aramæans, the Phœnicians and the Arabs, conquered
the old population, they received from it, along with
other elements of culture, the cuneiform system of
writing and the literature written in it. The sacred
hymns still continued to serve as a prayer-book, but
they were now provided with interlinear translations
<pb n='022'/><anchor id='Pg022'/>
into the Babylonian (or, as it is usually termed, the
Assyrian) language. Part of the literature consisted of
legal codes and decisions; and since the inheritance and
holding of property frequently depended on a knowledge
of these, it became necessary for the conquerors to
acquaint themselves with the language of the people
they had conquered. In course of time, however, the
two dialects of Sumir and Accad ceased to be spoken;
but the necessity for learning them still remained, and
we find accordingly that down to the latest days of both
Assyria and Babylonia the educated classes were taught
the old extinct Accadian, just as in modern Europe they
are taught Latin. From time to time, indeed, the
scribes of Sennacherib or Nebuchadnezzar attempted to
write in the ancient language, and in doing so sometimes
made similar mistakes to those that are made
now-a-days by a schoolboy in writing Latin.
</p>

<p>
The Accadians were, like the Chinese, pre-eminently
a literary people. Their conception of chaos was that
of a period when as yet no books were written. Accordingly,
a legend of the Creation, preserved in the
library of Cuthah, contains this curious statement:
<q>On a memorial-tablet none wrote, none explained, for
bodies and produce were not brought forth in the
earth.</q> To the author of the legend the art of writing
seemed to mount back to the very beginning of mankind.
</p>

<p>
This legend of the Creation, however, is not the
only one that has been recovered from the shipwreck
of Assyrian and Babylonian literature. Besides the
account given in the fragments of Berossus, there is
another, which bears a striking resemblance to the
account of the Creation in the first chapter of Genesis.
<pb n='023'/><anchor id='Pg023'/>
It does not appear, however, that this last was of
Accadian origin; at all events, there is no indication
that it was translated into Assyrian from an older
Accadian document, and there are even reasons for
thinking that it may not be earlier&mdash;in its present form
at least&mdash;than the seventh century <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> We possess,
unfortunately, only portions of it, since many of the
series of clay tablets on which it was inscribed have
been lost or injured. The account begins as follows:&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>
1. At that time the heavens above named not a name,
</p>

<p>
2. Nor did the earth below record one:
</p>

<p>
3. Yea, the deep was their first creator,
</p>

<p>
4. The flood of the sea was she who bore them all.
</p>

<p>
5. Their waters were embosomed in one place, and
</p>

<p>
6. The flowering reed was ungathered, the marsh-plant
was ungrown.
</p>

<p>
7. At that time the gods had not issued forth, any one of
them,
</p>

<p>
8. By no name were they recorded, no destiny (had they
fixed).
</p>

<p>
9. Then the (great) gods were made,
</p>

<p>
10. Lakhmu and Lakhamu issued forth (the first),
</p>

<p>
11. They grew up....
</p>

<p>
12. Next were made the host of heaven and earth,
</p>

<p>
13. The time was long (and then)
</p>

<p>
14. The gods Anu (Bel and Ea were born of)
</p>

<p>
15. The host of heaven and earth.
</p>
</quote>

<p>
It is not until we come to the fifth tablet of the series,
which describes the appointment of the heavenly bodies&mdash;the
work of the fourth day of creation, according to
Genesis&mdash;that the narrative is again preserved. Here
we read that the Creator <q>made beautiful the stations
of the great gods,</q> or stars, an expression which reminds
us of the oft-recurring phrase of Genesis: <q>And God
<pb n='024'/><anchor id='Pg024'/>
saw that it was good.</q> The stars, moon, and sun
were ordered to rule over the night and day, and to
determine the year, with its months and days. The latter
part of the tablet, however, like the latter part of the
first tablet, is destroyed, and of the next tablet&mdash;that
which described the creation of animals&mdash;only the first
few lines remain. <q>At that time,</q> it begins, <q>the gods
in their assembly created (the living creatures). They
made beautiful the mighty (animals). They made the
living beings come forth, the cattle of the field, the
beast of the field, and the creeping thing.</q> What
follows is too mutilated to yield a connected sense.
</p>

<p>
There is no need of pointing out how closely this
Assyrian account of the Creation resembles that of
Genesis. Even the very wording and phrases of Genesis
occur in it, and though no fragment is preserved which
expressly tells us that the work of the Creation was
accomplished in seven days, we may infer that such was
the case, from the order of events as recorded on the
tablets. But, with all this similarity, there is even greater
dissimilarity. The philosophical conceptions with which
the Assyrian account opens, the polytheistic colouring
which we find in it further on, have no parallel in the
Book of Genesis. The spirit of the two narratives is
essentially different.
</p>

<p>
The last tablet probably contained an account of the
institution of the Sabbath. At all events, we learn that
the seventh day was observed as a day of rest among
the Babylonians, as it was among the Jews. It was even
called by the same name of Sabbath, a word which is
defined in an Assyrian text as <q>a day of rest for the
heart,</q> while the Accadian equivalent is explained to
mean <q>a day of completion of labour.</q> A calendar of
<pb n='025'/><anchor id='Pg025'/>
saints' days for the month of the intercalary Elul makes
the seventh, fourteenth, twenty-first, and twenty-eighth
days of the lunar month Sabbaths, on which certain
works were forbidden to be done. On those days, it is
stated, <q>flesh cooked on the fire may not be eaten, the
clothing of the body may not be changed, white garments
may not be put on, a sacrifice may not be offered,
the king may not ride in his chariot, nor speak in public,
the augur may not mutter in a secret place, medicine of
the body may not be applied, nor may any curse be
uttered.</q> Nothing, in fact, that implied work was
allowed to be done. Where the Babylonian Sabbath
differed from the Jewish one was in its essentially lunar
character. The first Sabbath was the first day of a
month, whatever might be the length of the month that
preceded it. While Sabbaths and new moons are distinguished
from one another in the Old Testament, they
are found united in the Babylonian ritual. It is no
wonder, therefore, that the Babylonians were acquainted
with a week of seven days, each day of which was
dedicated to one of the seven planets; it was the space
of time naturally marked out by the four quarters of
the moon.
</p>

<p>
No account of the Fall of Man, similar to that in
Genesis, has as yet been found among the fragments of
the Assyrian libraries. Mr. George Smith, indeed,
supposed that he had discovered one, but the text
which he referred to the Fall, is really an ancient
hymn to the Creator. It is, nevertheless, pretty certain
that such an account once existed. An archaic Babylonian
gem represents a tree, on either side of which
are seated a man and woman, with a serpent behind
them, and their hands are stretched out towards the
<pb n='026'/><anchor id='Pg026'/>
fruit that hangs from the tree. A few stray references in
the bilingual (Accadian and Assyrian) dictionaries throw
some light upon this representation, and inform us that
the Accadians knew of <q>a wicked serpent,</q> <q>the
serpent of night</q> and <q>darkness,</q> which had brought
about the fall of man. The tree of life, of which so
many illustrations occur on Assyrian monuments, is
declared to be <q>the pine-tree</q> of Eridu, <q>the shrine of
the god Irnin;</q> and Irnin is a name of the Euphrates,
when regarded as the <q>snake-river,</q> which encircled
the world like a rope, and was the stream of Hea, <q>the
snake-god of the tree of life.</q> The Euphrates, we must
remember, was one of the rivers of Paradise.
</p>

<p>
The site of Paradise is to be sought for in Babylonia.
The garden which God planted was in Eden,
and Eden, as we learn from the cuneiform records, was
the ancient name of the <q>field</q> or plain of Babylonia,
where the first living creatures had been created. The
city of Eridu, which the people of Sumir called <q>the
good</q> or <q>holy,</q> was, as we have seen, the shrine of
Irnin, and in the midst of a forest or garden that
once lay near it grew <q>the holy pine-tree,</q> <q>the tree
of life.</q> The rivers of Eden can be found in the rivers
and canals of Babylonia. Two of them were the
Euphrates and Tigris, called by the Accadians <foreign rend='italic'>id Idikla</foreign>,
<q>the river of Idikla,</q> the Biblical Hiddekhel, while
Pishon is a Babylonian word signifying <q>canal,</q> and
Gihon may be the Accadian Gukhan, the stream on
which Babylon stood. Even the word <emph>cherub</emph> is itself
of Babylonian derivation. It is the name given to one
of those winged monsters, with the body of a bull and
the head of a man, which are sometimes placed in the
Assyrian sculptures on either side of the tree of life.
<pb n='027'/><anchor id='Pg027'/>
They stood at the entrance of a Babylonian palace, and
were supposed to prevent the evil spirits from entering
within. The word comes from a root which means <q>to
approach</q> or <q>be near,</q> and perhaps originally signified
one who was near to God.
</p>

<p>
Like <emph>cherub</emph>, <emph>Adam</emph> also was a Babylonian word. It
has the general sense of <q>man,</q> and is used in this
sense both in Hebrew and in Assyrian. But as in
Hebrew it has come to be the proper name of the first
man, so, too, in the old Babylonian legends, the
<q>Adamites</q> were <q>the white race</q> of Semitic descent,
who stood in marked contrast to <q>the black heads</q>
or Accadians of primitive Babylonia. Originally, however,
it was this dark race itself that claimed to have
been <q>the men</q> whom the god Merodach created; and
it was not until after the Semitic conquest of Chaldea
that the children of Adamu or Adam were supposed to
denote the white Semitic population. Hence it is that
the dark race continued to the last to be called the
Adamatu or <q>red-skins,</q> which a popular etymology
connected with <hi rend='italic'>Adamu</hi> <q>man.</q> Sir H. Rawlinson has
suggested a parallel between the dark and white races of
Babylonia and the <q>sons of God</q> and <q>daughters of
men</q> of Genesis. Adam, we are told, was <q>the son of
God</q> (Luke iii. 38). But nothing similar to what we
read in the sixth chapter of Genesis has as yet been
met with among the cuneiform records, and though
these speak of giant heroes, like Ner and Etanna, who
lived before the Flood, we know nothing as yet as to
their parentage.
</p>

<p>
The Babylonians, however, were well aware that the
Deluge had been caused by the wickedness of the
human race. It has often been remarked that though
<pb n='028'/><anchor id='Pg028'/>
traditions of a universal or a partial deluge are found
all over the world, it is only in the Old Testament that
the cause assigned for it is a moral one. The Chaldean
account of the Deluge, discovered by Mr. George
Smith, offers an exception to this rule. Here, as in
Genesis, Sisuthros, the Accadian Noah, is saved from
destruction on account of his piety, the rest of mankind
being drowned as a punishment for their sins.
</p>

<p>
The story of the Deluge formed the subject of more
than one poem among the Accadians. Two of these
were amalgamated together by the author of a great
epic in twelve books, which described the adventures of
a solar hero whose name cannot be read with certainty,
but may provisionally be pronounced Gisdhubar. The
amalgamated account was introduced as an episode
into the eleventh book, the whole epic being arranged
upon an astronomical principle, so that each book
should correspond to one of the signs of the Zodiac, the
eleventh book consequently answering to Aquarius.
Sisuthros, who had been translated without dying, like
the Biblical Enoch, is made to tell the story himself to
Gisdhubar. Gisdhubar had travelled in search of
health to the shores of the river of death at the mouth
of the Euphrates, and here afar off in the other world he
sees and talks with Sisuthros. Fragments of several
editions of the poem have been found, not only among
the ruins of Nineveh, but also in Babylonia; and by
fitting these together it has been possible to recover
almost the whole of the original text. The translations
of it made by different scholars have necessarily
improved with the progress of Assyrian research, and
though the first translation given to the world by Mr.
George Smith was substantially correct, there were
<pb n='029'/><anchor id='Pg029'/>
many minor inaccuracies in it which have since had to
be corrected. The latest and best version is that which
has been published by Professor Haupt. The following
translation of the account is based upon it:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
(Col. I) <q rend='pre'>Sisuthros speaks to him, even to Gisdhubar:
Let me reveal unto thee, Gisdhubar, the story of my preservation,
and the oracle of the gods let me tell to thee.
The city of Surippak, the city which, as thou knowest, is
built on the Euphrates, this city was already ancient
when the gods within it set their hearts to bring on a
deluge, even the great gods as many as there are&mdash;their
father Anu, their king the warrior Bel, their throne-bearer
Adar, their prince En-nugi. Ea, the lord of
wisdom, sat along with them, and repeated their decree:
<q>For their boat! as a boat, as a boat, a hull, a hull!
hearken to their boat, and understand the hull, O man
of Surippak, son of Ubara-Tutu; dig up the house,
build the ship, save what thou canst of the germ of life.
(The gods) will destroy the seed of life, but do thou live,
and bid the seed of life of every kind mount into the
midst of the ship. The ship which thou shalt build,
... cubits shall be its length in measure, ...
cubits the content of its breadth and its height. (Above)
the deep cover it in.</q> I understood and spake to Ea,
my lord: <q>The building of the ship which thou hast
commanded thus, if it be done by me, the children of
the people and the old men (alike will laugh at me).</q>
Ea opened his mouth and said, he speaks to me his
servant: <q>(If they laugh at thee) thou shalt say unto
them, (Every one) who has turned against me and (dis-believes
the oracle that) has been given me, ... I
will judge above and below. (But as for thee) shut (not)
the door (until) the time comes of which I will send thee
<pb n='030'/><anchor id='Pg030'/>
word. (Then) enter the door of the ship, and bring into
the midst of it thy corn, thy property, and thy goods,
thy (family), thy household, thy concubines, and the
sons of the people. The cattle of the field, the wild
beasts of the field, as many as I would preserve, I will
send unto thee, and they shall keep thy door.</q> Sisuthros
opened his mouth and speaks; he says to Ea, his lord:
<q>(O my lord) no one yet has built a ship (in this fashion)
on land to contain the beasts (of the field). (The plan?)
let me see and the ship (I will build). On the land the
ship (I will build) as thou hast commanded me.</q>...</q>
</p>

<p>
(Col. II) <q rend='pre'>... On the fifth day (after it was begun)
in its circuit(?) fourteen measures its hull (measured);
fourteen measures measured (the roof) above it. I made
it a dwelling-house(?).... I enclosed it. I compacted
it six times, I divided (its passages) seven times, I
divided its interior (seven) times. Leaks for the waters
in the midst of it I cut off. I saw the rents, and what
was wanting I added. Three <foreign rend='italic'>sari</foreign> of bitumen I poured
over the outside. Three <foreign rend='italic'>sari</foreign> of bitumen I poured over
the inside. Three <foreign rend='italic'>sari</foreign> of men, carrying baskets, who
carried on their heads food, I provided, even a <foreign rend='italic'>saros</foreign> of
food for the people to eat, while two <foreign rend='italic'>sari</foreign> of food the
boatmen shared. To (the gods) I caused oxen to be
sacrificed; I (established offerings) each day. In (the
ship) beer, food, and wine (I collected) like the waters of
a river, and (I heaped them up) like the dust(?) of the
earth, and (in the ship) the food with my hand I placed.
(With the help) of Samas [the Sun-God] the compacting
of the ship was finished; (all parts of the ship) were
made strong, and I caused the tackling to be carried
above and below. (Then of my household) went two-thirds:
all that I had I heaped together; all that I had
<pb n='031'/><anchor id='Pg031'/>
of silver I heaped together; all that I had of gold I
heaped together; all that I had of the seed of life I
heaped together. I brought the whole up into the ship;
all my slaves and concubines, the cattle of the field, the
beasts of the field, the sons of the people, all of them,
did I bring up. The season Samas fixed, and he spake,
saying: <q>In the night will I cause the heaven to rain
destruction. Enter into the midst of the ship and close
thy door.</q> The season came round; he spake, saying:
<q>In the night will I cause the heaven to rain destruction.</q>
Of that day I reached the evening, the day which I
watched for with fear. I entered into the midst of the
ship and shut the door, that I might close the ship. To
Buzur-sadi-rabi, the boatman, I gave the palace, with all
its goods. Then arose Mu-seri-ina-namari (The Water
of Dawn at Daylight) from the horizon of heaven (like)
a black cloud. Rimmon in the midst of it thundered, and
Nebo and the Wind-God go in front: the throne-bearers
go over mountain and plain: Nergal the mighty removes
the wicked; Adar goes overthrowing all before him.
The spirits of earth carried the flood; in their terribleness
they sweep through the land; the deluge of Rimmon
reaches unto heaven; all that was light to (darkness)
was turned.</q>
</p>

<p>
(Col. III) <q rend='pre'>(The surface) of the land like (fire?)
they wasted; (they destroyed all) life from the face
of the land; to battle against men they brought (the
waters). Brother saw not his brother; men knew not
one another. In heaven the gods feared the flood,
and sought a refuge; they ascended to the heaven of
Anu. The gods, like a dog in his kennel, crouched down
in a heap. Istar cries like a mother, the great goddess
utters her speech: <q>All to clay is turned, and the evil I
<pb n='032'/><anchor id='Pg032'/>
prophesied in the presence of the gods, according as I
prophesied evil in the presence of the gods, for the
destruction of my people I prophesied (it) against them;
and though I their mother have begotten my people, like
the spawn of the fishes they fill the sea.</q> Then the gods
were weeping with her because of the spirits of earth;
the gods on a throne were seated in weeping; covered
were their lips because of the coming evil. Six days
and nights the wind, the flood, and the storm go on
overwhelming. The seventh day when it approached
the storm subsided, the flood which had fought against
(men) like an armed host was quieted. The sea began
to dry, and the wind and the flood ended. I watched
the sea making a noise, and the whole of mankind was
turned to clay; like reeds the corpses floated. I opened
the window, and the light smote upon my face; I
stooped and sat down; I weep, over my face flow my
tears. I watch the regions at the edge of the sea; a
district rose twelve measures high. To the land of
Nizir steered the ship; the mountain of Nizir stopped
the ship, and it was not able to pass over it. The first
day, the second day, the mountain of Nizir stopped the
ship. The third day, the fourth day, the mountain of
Nizir stopped the ship. The fifth day, the sixth day,
the mountain of Nizir stopped the ship. The seventh
day when it approached I sent forth a dove, and it left.
The dove went and returned, and found no resting-place,
and it came back. Then I sent forth a swallow, and it
left. The swallow went and returned, and found no
resting-place, and it came back. I sent forth a raven,
and it left. The raven went and saw the carrion on the
water, and it ate, it swam, it wandered away; it did not
return. I sent (the animals) forth to the four winds, I
<pb n='033'/><anchor id='Pg033'/>
sacrificed a sacrifice. I built an altar on the peak of the
mountain. I set vessels [each containing the third of an
ephah] by sevens; underneath them I spread reeds,
pine-wood, and spices. The gods smelt the savour; the
gods smelt the good savour; the gods gathered like flies
over the sacrifices. Thereupon the great goddess at her
approach lighted up the rainbow which Anu had created
according to his glory. The crystal brilliance of those
gods before me may I not forget;</q>
</p>

<p>
(Col. IV) <q>those days I have thought of, and never
may I forget them. May the gods come to my altar;
but may Bel not come to my altar, since he did not
consider but caused the flood, and my people he
assigned to the abyss. When thereupon Bel at his
approach saw the ship, Bel stopped; he was filled with
anger against the gods and the spirits of heaven:
'Let none come forth alive! let no man live in the
abyss!' Adar opened his mouth and spake, he says to
the warrior Bel: <q>Who except Ea can form a design?
Yea, Ea knows, and all things he communicates.</q> Ea
opened his mouth and spake, he says to the warrior Bel:
<q>Thou, O warrior prince of the gods, why, why didst
thou not consider but causedst a flood? Let the doer of
sin bear his sin, let the doer of wickedness bear his
wickedness. May the just prince not be cut off, may the
faithful not be (destroyed). Instead of causing a flood,
let lions increase, that men may be minished; instead of
causing a flood, let hyænas increase, that men may be
minished; instead of causing a flood, let a famine
happen, that men may be (wasted); instead of causing a
flood, let plague increase, that men may be (reduced). I
did not reveal the determination of the great gods
To Sisuthros alone a dream I sent, and he heard the
<pb n='034'/><anchor id='Pg034'/>
determination of the gods.</q> When Bel had again taken
counsel with himself, he went up into the midst of the
ship. He took my hand and bid me ascend, even me
he bid ascend; he united my wife to my side; he turned
himself to us and joined himself to us in covenant; he
blesses us (thus): <q>Hitherto Sisuthros has been a mortal
man, but now Sisuthros and his wife are united together
in being raised to be like the gods; yea, Sisuthros shall
dwell afar off at the mouth of the rivers.</q> They took
me, and afar off at the mouth of the rivers they made
me dwell.</q>
</p>

<p>
It is hardly necessary to indicate the points of agreement
and disagreement between this Babylonian account
of the Deluge and that of Genesis. The most striking
difference between the two, that which first meets the eye,
is the polytheism of the Babylonian version, in contrast
with the monotheism of the Biblical narrative. Here,
in place of the gods of Chaldea, we are confronted by
the one supreme Deity; we have no longer to do with a
Bel who requires the intercession of Ea before he will
consent not to destroy the guiltless with the guilty; it
is the Lord Himself who <q>said in His heart, I will not
again curse the ground any more for man's sake.</q> In
the Babylonian legend, moreover, Noah and Enoch
have been confounded together; Sisuthros is not only
saved from the waters of the flood, but translated to the
abode of the gods. The vessel itself in which the seed
of life was preserved is not the same in the two accounts.
According to the Hebrew narrative, it was an ark;
according to the Babylonian poem, a ship. It is true
that in one place it is called <q>a palace,</q> the word used
being the same as that which in many passages of the
Old Testament is applied to God's <q>palace</q> of heaven;
<pb n='035'/><anchor id='Pg035'/>
but it is provided with a pilot, Buzur-sadi-rabi, <q>the Sun-god
of the mighty mountain,</q> and Sisuthros is made to
expostulate on the strangeness of building a ship which
should sail over the land. It must, however, be noticed
that the shrines in which the images of the gods were
carried in Babylonia were called <q>ships,</q> and that these
<q>ships</q> corresponded with the ark of the Hebrew
tabernacle.
</p>

<p>
The land of Nizir, in which the vessel of Sisuthros
rested, was among the mountains of Pir Mam, to the
north-east of Babylonia. Rowandiz, the highest peak
in this part of Asia, rises a little to the north of the Pir
Mam, and it seems probable, therefore, that it represents
<q>the mountain of Nizir.</q> The whole country had been
included by the Accadians in the vast territory of Guti,
or Gutium, which roughly corresponds with the modern
Kurdistan. It is accordingly worth notice that a wide-spread
eastern tradition makes Gebel Gudi, or Mount
Gudi, the mountain on which the ark rested, and that in
early Jewish legend this mountain is called Lubar or
Baris, the boundary between Armenia and Kurdistan,
in the land of the Minni. Ararat, or Urardhu, as it is
written in the cuneiform inscriptions, denoted Armenia,
and more particularly the district about Lake Van; so
that <q>the mountains of Ararat,</q> of which Genesis
speaks, might easily have been the Kurdish ranges of
Southern Armenia. It was not until a very late period
that the name of Ararat was first applied and then
confined to the lofty mountains in the north.
</p>

<p>
Rowandiz seems also to have been regarded in Accadian
mythology as the Olympos on which the gods
dwelt. In this case it was usually called <q>the mountain
of the east;</q> but the east was here the north-east, since
<pb n='036'/><anchor id='Pg036'/>
other legends identified it with Aralu, or Hades, the
mountain of gold which was fabled to be in the far
north. It is to this Accadian Olympos that reference is
made in Isa. xiv. 13, where the King of Babylon is
described as boasting that he would <q>ascend into heaven,
and exalt his throne above the stars of the gods,</q> that
he would <q>sit on the mountain of the assembly of the
gods in the extremities of the north.</q> The mountain
was sometimes known as the <q>mountain of the world,</q>
since the firmament was supposed to revolve on its peak
as on a pivot. We must not imagine, however, that the
Accadians, any more than the Greeks, actually believed
the gods to live above the clouds on the terrestrial
Rowandiz, except at a very early period in their history.
Just as we do not think of the sky when we use the
word heaven in a spiritual sense, so by <q>the mountain
of the assembly of the gods</q> they meant a spiritual
mountain, of which Rowandiz was the earthly type. It
is in this way that we must explain the position
assigned to Sisuthros after his translation. He does not
live along with the gods in the north, but has his station
fixed <q>at the mouth of the rivers</q> Euphrates and
Tigris, which in ancient times flowed into the Persian
Gulf through separate channels. At an epoch when
the geographical knowledge of the Accadians did not
extend very far, the unknown district beyond the
mouth of the Euphrates became a representative of the
other world; and the Euphrates itself was identified
with Datilla, the river of <q>the God of life and death,</q>
as well as with the stream or <q>great deep</q> which was
supposed to encircle the earth like a monstrous
serpent.
</p>

<p>
The name of the Chaldean Noah, Sisuthros, or, as it
<pb n='037'/><anchor id='Pg037'/>
is written in the cuneiform, Khasis-adra, or Adra-khasis,
is really a title, given to him on account of his righteousness,
and signifying <q>wise (and) pious.</q> His proper
name is one which means <q>the Sun of Life,</q> though
the exact pronunciation of it is somewhat uncertain.
Neither of these names agrees with that of the Biblical
Noah, but the latter has received a full explanation
from the Assyrian language, where it signifies <q>rest.</q>
</p>

<p>
After the Flood, we are told in Genesis that men
journeyed from the east until they came to the plain of
Shinar, where they built the tower of Babel, in the vain
hope of ascending into heaven. God, however, confounded
their language and scattered them over the face
of the earth. The references in this narrative to Shinar
and Babel, or Babylon, indicate that here again we may
expect to find a Babylonian account of the Confusion
of Tongues, just as we have found a Babylonian account
of the Deluge. As we have seen, the Accadians regarded
themselves as having come from the <q>mountain
of the east</q> where the ark had rested, while Shinar is
the Hebrew form of the native name Sumir&mdash;or Sungir,
as it was pronounced in the allied dialect of Accad&mdash;the
southern half of pre-Semitic Babylonia. Now Mr.
George Smith discovered some broken fragments of a
cuneiform text which evidently related to the building
of the Tower of Babel. It tells us how certain men
had <q>turned against the father of all the gods,</q> and
how the thoughts of their leader's heart <q>were evil.</q> At
Babylon they essayed to build <q>a mound</q> or hill-like
tower, but the winds blew down their work, and Anu
<q>confounded great and small on the mound,</q> as well as
their <q>speech,</q> and <q>made strange their counsel.</q> The
very word that is used in the sense of <q>confounding</q>
<pb n='038'/><anchor id='Pg038'/>
in the narrative of Genesis is used also in the Assyrian
text. The Biblical writer, by a play upon words, not
uncommon in the Old Testament, compares it with the
name of Babel, though etymologically the latter word
has nothing to do with it. Babel is the Assyrian Babili,
<q>Gate of God,</q> and is merely a Semitic translation
of the old Accadian (or rather Sumirian) name of the
town, Ca-dimíra, where Ca is <q>gate</q> and dimíra <q>God.</q>
Chaldean tradition assigned the construction of the
tower and the consequent confusion of languages to the
time of the autumnal equinox; and it is possible that the
hero-king Etanna (Titan in Greek writers), who is stated
to have built a city in defiance of the will of heaven, was
the wicked chief under whom the tower was raised.
</p>

<p>
The confusion of tongues was followed by the dispersion
of mankind. The earth was again peopled by
the descendants of the three sons of Noah&mdash;Shem, Ham,
and Japhet. Shem is the Assyrian Samu, <q>olive-coloured,</q>
Ham is Khammu, <q>burned black,</q> and Japhet
Ippat, <q>the white race.</q> The tribes and races which
drew their origin from them are enumerated in the tenth
chapter of Genesis. The arrangement of this chapter,
however, is geographical, not ethnological; the peoples
named in it being grouped together according to their
geographical position, not according to their relationship
in blood or language. Here it is that the non-Semitic
Elamites are classed along with the Semitic Assyrians,
and that the Phœnicians of Canaan, who spoke the same
language as the Hebrews, and originally came from the
same ancestors, are associated with the Egyptians.
When this fact is recognised, there is no difficulty in
showing that the statements of the chapter are fully
consistent with the conclusions of modern research.
</p>

<pb n='039'/><anchor id='Pg039'/>

<p>
The Assyrian inscriptions have thrown a good deal of
light upon the names contained in it. Gomer, the son
of Japhet, represents the Gimirrai of the inscriptions, the
Kimmerians of classical writers. Pressed by the Scyths
of the Russian steppes, they threatened to overrun the
Assyrian empire under a leader named Teispes, but
were defeated by Esar-haddon, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 670, in a great
battle on the north-eastern frontier of his kingdom, and
driven westwards into Asia Minor. There they sacked
the Greek town of Sinôpè, and spread like locusts over
the fertile plains of Lydia. Among the gifts sent to
Nineveh by the Lydian king, Gugu or Gyges&mdash;a name
in which we may see the Gog of Ezekiel&mdash;were two
Kimmerian chieftains whom he had captured with his
own hand. Gyges was afterwards slain in battle with
the barbarians, and it required some years before they
could be finally extirpated.
</p>

<p>
Madai are the Medes, a title given by the Assyrians
to the multifarious tribes to the east of Kurdistan. They
are first mentioned in the inscriptions about 820 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>,
and were partially subdued by Tiglath-Pileser II and
his successors. At this time they lived in independent
communities, each governed by its <q>city-chief.</q> The
Median empire, which rose upon the ruins of Nineveh,
was really the creation of the kings of Ekbatana, the
modern Hamadan. The population of this district was
known among the Babylonians as <foreign rend='italic'>manda</foreign>, or
<q>barbarians;</q> and through a confusion of the latter word
with the proper name Madâ, or <q>Medes,</q> historians have
been led to suppose that the empire of Ekbatana was a
Median one.
</p>

<p>
Javan is the Greek word <q>Ionian,</q> but in the Old
Testament it is generally applied to the island of
<pb n='040'/><anchor id='Pg040'/>
Cyprus, which is called the Island of Yavnan, or the
Ionians, on the Assyrian monuments. A more specific
name for it in Hebrew is Kittim, derived from the name
of the Phœnician colony of Kition, now represented by
Larnaka. Cyprus was first visited by the Babylonians
at a very remote period, since Sargon I of Accad, who,
according to Nabonidos (<hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 550), lived 3,200 years
before his time, carried his arms as far as its shores.
As for Tubal and Meshech, they are as frequently
associated together in the Assyrian inscriptions as they
are in the Bible. The Tubal or Tibarêni spread in Old
Testament times over the south-eastern part of Kappadokia,
while the Meshech or Moschi adjoined them
on the north and west. Ashkenaz is the Assyrian
Asguza, the name of a district which lay between the
kingdoms of Ekbatana and the Minni.
</p>

<p>
Cush and Mizraim denote Ethiopia and Egypt,
Ethiopia roughly corresponding to the Nubia of today.
As Ethiopia was largely peopled by tribes who
had come across the Red Sea from Southern Arabia,
the name of Cush was given in the Old Testament
(as in verse 7 of this chapter) to Southern Arabia
also. Properly speaking, however, it denoted the
country which commenced on the southern side of the
First Cataract. Mizraim means <q>the two Matsors,</q>
that is Upper and Lower Egypt. Lower Egypt was
the original Matsor, a word which signifies <q>wall,</q> and
referred to the line of fortification which defended the
kingdom on the eastern side from the attacks of
Asiatic tribes. The word occurs more than once in the
Biblical writers, though its sense has been obscured in
the Authorised Version. Thus in Isaiah xxxvii. 25,
Sennacherib boasts that he has <q>dried up all the rivers
<pb n='041'/><anchor id='Pg041'/>
of Matsor,</q> that is to say, the mouths of the Nile; and in
Isaiah xix. 6, we ought to translate <q>the Nile-arms of
Matsor,</q> instead of <q>brooks of defence.</q> While Matsor
was the name of Lower Egypt, Upper Egypt was termed
Pathros (Isa. xi. 11), which is the Egyptian Pe-to-res
or <q>southern land.</q> The Pathrusim or inhabitants of
Pathros are mentioned among the sons of Mizraim in
the chapter of Genesis upon which we are engaged.
</p>

<p>
Phut seems to be the Egyptian Punt, on the Somali
coast. Spices and other precious objects of merchandise
were brought from it, and the Egyptians sometimes
called it <q>the divine land.</q> The Lehabim of verse 13
are the Libyans, while the Naphtuhim may be the
people of Napata in Ethiopia. The Caphtorim or
inhabitants of Caphtor are the Phœnician population
settled on the coast of the Delta. From an early period
the whole of this district had been colonised by the
Phœnicians, and, as Phœnicia itself was called Keft by
the Egyptians, the part of Egypt in which they had
settled went by the name of Keft-ur or <q>greater
Phœnicia.</q> From various passages of the Old Testament<note place='foot'>Deut.
ii. 23, Jer. xlvii. 4, Amos ix. 7.</note>
we learn that the Philistines, whom the kings of
Egypt had once employed to garrison the five cities in
the extreme south of Palestine, had originally been
Phœnicians of Caphtor, so that the words of the verse
before us must have been moved from their proper
place, <q>Caphtorim, out of whom came Philistim,</q> being
the correct reading.
</p>

<p>
Canaan signifies <q>the lowlands,</q> and was primarily
the name of the coast on which the great cities of
Phœnicia were built. As, however, the inland parts of
the country were inhabited by a kindred population, the
<pb n='042'/><anchor id='Pg042'/>
name came to be extended to designate the whole of
Palestine, just as Palestine itself meant originally only
the small territory of the Philistines. In Isaiah's prophecy
upon Tyre (xxiii. 11) the word is used in its
primitive sense, though here again the Authorised
Version has misled the English reader by mistranslating
<q>the merchant-city</q> instead of <q>Canaan.</q> Sidon,
<q>the fishers' town,</q> was the oldest of the Canaanite or
Phœnician cities; like Tyre, it was divided into two
quarters, known respectively as Greater and Lesser
Sidon. Heth or the Hithites adjoined the Phœnicians
on the north; we shall have a good deal to say about
them in a future chapter, and therefore pass them by
now. The Amorite was the inhabitant of the mountains
of Palestine, in contrast to the Canaanite or lowlander,
and the name is met with on the Egyptian monuments.
The towns of Arka and Simirra (or Zemar) are both
mentioned by Tiglath-Pileser II, while the city of Arvad
or Arados (now Ruâd) is repeatedly named in the
Assyrian inscriptions. So also is Hamath (now Hamah),
which was conquered by Sargon, and made by him the
seat of an Assyrian governor.
</p>

<p>
The name of Elam has first received its explanation
from the decipherment of the Assyrian texts. It was
the name of the mountainous region to the east of
Babylonia, of which Shushan or Susa was at one time
the capital, and is nothing more than the Assyrian word
<foreign rend='italic'>elam</foreign>, <q>high.</q>
<foreign rend='italic'>Elam</foreign> was itself a translation of the
Accadian <foreign rend='italic'>Numma</foreign>, under which the Accadians included
the whole of the highlands which bounded the plain
of Babylonia on its eastern side. It was the seat of
an ancient monarchy which rivalled in antiquity that
of Chaldea itself, and was long a dangerous neighbour
<pb n='043'/><anchor id='Pg043'/>
to the latter. It was finally overthrown, however, by
Assur-bani-pal, the Assyrian king, about <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 645. The
native title of the country was Anzan or Ansan, and the
name of its capital, Susan or Shushan, seems to have
signified <q>the old town</q> in the language of its
inhabitants.
</p>

<p>
Asshur or Assur was originally the name of a city on
the banks of the Tigris, the ruins of which are now
known as Kalah Sherghat. The name was of Accadian
derivation, and signified <q>water-bank.</q> The city long
continued to be the capital of the district which was
called after it Assyria, but was eventually supplanted
by Ninua or Nineveh. Nineveh lay opposite the
present town of Mosul, and it is from the remains of its
chief palace, now buried under the mounds of Kouyunjik,
that most of the Assyrian inscriptions in the British
Museum have been brought. A few miles to the south
of Nineveh, on the site now known as Nimrûd, was
Calah, a town built by Shalmaneser I, who lived
<hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 1300. Calah subsequently fell into ruins, but was
rebuilt in the ninth century before our era. <q>Between
Nineveh and Calah</q> stood Resen, according to Genesis.
Resen is the Assyrian <foreign rend='italic'>Ris-eni</foreign>, <q>head of the stream,</q>
which is once mentioned in an inscription of Sennacherib.
Rehoboth ´Ir, or <q>the open spaces of the
city,</q> must have denoted the suburbs of Nineveh, and
cannot be identified with Dur-Sarrukin, founded by
Sargon at Khorsabad, several miles to the north.
</p>

<p>
It is plain from the context that Arphaxad must
signify Chaldea; and this conclusion is verified by the
fact that the name might also be pronounced Arpa-Chesed,
or <q>border of Chaldæa.</q> Chesed is the singular
of Casdim, the word used in the Old Testament to
<pb n='044'/><anchor id='Pg044'/>
denote the inhabitants of Babylonia. The origin of it
is doubtful, but, as has been suggested above, it most
probably represents the Assyrian <foreign rend='italic'>casidi</foreign>,
<q>conquerors,</q> a term which might very well be applied to the
Semitic conquerors of Sumir and Accad. The Greek
word Chaldeans is derived from the Kaldâ, a tribe
which lived on the shores of the Persian Gulf, and is
first heard of in the ninth century before our era. Under
Merodach-Baladan, the Kaldâ made themselves masters
of Babylonia, and became so integral a part of the
population as to give their name to the whole of it in
classical times.
</p>

<p>
Aram, the brother of Arphaxad, represents, of course,
the Aramæans of Aram, or <q>the highlands,</q> which
included the greater part of Mesopotamia and Syria.
In the later days of the Assyrian Empire, Aramaic, the
language of Aram, became the common language of
trade and diplomacy, which every merchant and politician
was supposed to learn, and in still later times
succeeded in supplanting Assyrian in Assyria and
Babylonia, as well as Hebrew in Palestine, until in its
turn it was supplanted by Arabic.
</p>

<p>
Lud seems to be a misreading; at all events, Lydia
and the Lydians, on the extreme western coast of Asia
Minor, had nothing to do with the peoples of Elam,
of Assyria, and of Aram. What the original reading
was, however, it is now impossible to say.
</p>

<p>
In the midst of all these geographical names we find
a notice inserted relating to <q>the mighty hunter</q>
Nimrod, the beginning of whose kingdom, we are told,
was Babylon, and Erech, and Accad, and Calneh in the
land of Shinar. His name has not yet been discovered
in the cuneiform records. Some Assyrian scholars have
<pb n='045'/><anchor id='Pg045'/>
wished to identify him with Gisdhubar, the hero of the
great Chaldean epic, which contains the account of the
Deluge; but Gisdhubar was a solar hero who had
originally been the Accadian god of fire. It is true that
Gisdhubar was the special deity of the town of Marad,
and that Na-Marad would signify in the Accadian
language <q>the prince of Marad</q>; such a title, however,
has not been found in the inscriptions. Erech, called
Uruk on the monuments, is now represented by the
mounds of Warka, far away to the south of Babylon,
and was one of the oldest and most important of the
Babylonian cities. Like Calneh, the Kul-unu of the
monuments, it was situated in the division of the
country known as Sumir or Shinar. Accad, from
which the northern division of the country took its
name, was a suburb of Sippara (now Abu-Habba), and,
along with the latter, made up the Sepharvaim or
<q>Two Sipparas</q> of Scripture. The Accadian form
of the name was Agadê, and here was the seat of a
great library formed in remote days by Sargon I, and
containing, among other treasures, a work on astronomy
and astrology in seventy-two books.
</p>

<p>
The translation of the verse which follows the list of
Nimrod's Babylonian cities is doubtful. It is a question
whether we should render with the Authorised Version:
<q>Out of that land went forth Asshur,</q> or prefer the
alternative translation: <q>Out of that land he went
forth to Assyria.</q> The latter is favoured by Micah v. 6,
where <q>the land of Nimrod</q> appears to mean Assyria.
But the question cannot be finally decided until we
discover some positive information about Nimrod on the
monuments.
</p>

<p>
If, however, little light has been thrown by modern
<pb n='046'/><anchor id='Pg046'/>
research on the person of Nimrod, this is by no means
the case as regards Abraham. Abu-ramu or Abram,
<q>the exalted father,</q> Abraham's original name, is a
name which also occurs on early Babylonian contract-tablets.
Sarah, again, is the Assyrian <foreign rend='italic'>sarrat</foreign>, <q>queen,</q>
while Milcah, the daughter of Haran, is the Assyrian
<foreign rend='italic'>milcat</foreign>, <q>princess.</q> The site of Ur of the Chaldees,
the birthplace of Abram, has been discovered, and excavations
have been made among the ruins of its temples.
The site is now called Mugheir, and lies on the western
side of the Euphrates, on the border of the desert,
immediately to the west of Erech. The chief temple of
Ur was dedicated to the moon-god, and the Accadian
inscriptions on its bricks, which record its foundation, are
among the earliest that we possess. It was, in fact, the
capital of one of the oldest of the pre-Semitic dynasties,
and its very name, Uru or Ur, is only the Semitic form
of the Accadian <foreign rend='italic'>eri</foreign>, <q>city.</q> It is probable that
it had passed into the hands of the Semitic <q>Casdim</q> before
the age of Abraham; at all events, it had long been the
resort of Semitic traders, who had ceased to lead the
roving life of their ancestors in the Arabian desert.
From Ur, Abraham's father had migrated to Haran, in
the northern part of Mesopotamia, on the high road
which led from Babylonia and Assyria into Syria and
Palestine. Why he should have migrated to so distant
a city has been a great puzzle, and has tempted scholars
to place both Ur and Haran in wrong localities; but
here, again, the cuneiform inscriptions have at last
furnished us with the key. As far back as the Accadian
epoch, the district in which Haran was built belonged
to the rulers of Babylonia; Haran was, in fact, the
frontier town of the empire, commanding at once the
<pb n='047'/><anchor id='Pg047'/>
highway into the west and the fords of the Euphrates;
the name itself was an Accadian one signifying <q>the
road</q>; and the deity to whom it was dedicated was the
moon-god of Ur. The symbol of this deity was a
conical stone, with a star above it, and gems with this
symbol engraved upon them may be seen in the British
Museum.
</p>

<p>
The road which passed through Haran was well
known to the Chaldean kings and their subjects.
Sargon I of Accad, and his son Naram-Sin, had already
made expeditions into the far west. Sargon had carved
his image on the rocks of the Mediterranean coast, and
had even crossed over into the island of Cyprus. The
campaign, therefore, of Chedor-laomer and his allies,
recorded in the fourteenth chapter of Genesis, was no
new thing. The soil of Canaan had already felt the
tramp of Babylonian feet. We can even fix the approximate
date at which the campaign took place, and when
Abraham and his confederates surprised the invaders and
recovered from them the spoils of Southern Palestine.
For twelve years, we are told, the tribes in the neighbourhood
of the Dead Sea had served Chedor-laomer,
king of Elam, and then they rebelled; but the rebellion
was quickly followed by invasion. Chedor-laomer and
<q>the kings that were with him,</q>&mdash;Amraphel, king of
Shinar, Arioch, king of Ellasar, and Tidal, <q>king of
nations,</q>&mdash;marched against the revolters, overthrew them
in battle, and carried them away captive. The name of
Arioch is actually found on the cuneiform monuments.
Bricks have been discovered engraved with the legend
of Eri-aku, king of Larsa, the son of Kudur-Mabug the
Elamite. Eri-aku means in Accadian <q>the servant of the
moon-god,</q> and Larsa, his capital, is now represented
<pb n='048'/><anchor id='Pg048'/>
by the mounds of Senkereh, a little to the east of
Erech. Kudur-Mabug is entitled <q>the father of Palestine,</q>
and it would, therefore, seem that he claimed
supremacy over Canaan. His name is an Elamite one,
signifying <q>the servant of the god Mabug,</q> and is
closely parallel to the Biblical Chedor-laomer, that is,
Kudur-Lagamar, <q>the servant of the god Lagamar.</q>
Lagamar and Mabug, however, were different deities,
and we cannot, therefore, identify Chedor-laomer and
Kudur-Mabug together. But it is highly probable that
they were brothers, Chedor-laomer being the elder, who
held sway in Elam, while his nephew Eri-aku owned
allegiance to him in Southern Babylonia. At any rate,
it is plain from the history of Genesis that Babylon was
at this time subject to Elam, and under the government
of more than one ruler. Amraphel would have been
king of that portion of Sumir, or Southern Chaldea,
which was not comprised in the dominions of the king
of Larsa; and the fact that the narrative begins by
stating that the campaign in Palestine was made in his
days, seems to imply that the whole account has been
extracted from the Babylonian archives. As for <q>Tidal,
king of nations,</q> it is very possible that we ought to
read Turgal (Thorgal), with the Septuagint, while Goyyim
or <q>nations</q> has been shown by Sir Henry Rawlinson
to be a misreading for Gutium, the name given to the
tract of country northward of Babylonia, which stretched
from Mesopotamia to the mountains of Kurdistan, and
within which the kingdom of Assyria afterwards arose.
</p>

<p>
Now, the Assyrian king Assur-bani-pal tells us that
an image of the goddess Nana had been carried away
from Babylonia by the Elamite king Kudur-Nankhundi
when he overran Chaldea 1635 years before his own
<pb n='049'/><anchor id='Pg049'/>
time, that is to say, in 2280 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> It is possible that this
invasion of the country by Kudur-Nankhundi was the
beginning of Elamite supremacy in Babylonia, and that
Kudur-Mabug and Chedor-laomer were descendants of
his. If so, we shall have an approximate date for the
rescue of Lot by Abraham, and consequently for the
age of Abraham himself.
</p>

<p>
The fourteenth chapter of Genesis is the last in the
Book that relates to Babylonia. The history now turns
to Egypt; and it is, therefore, from the monuments of
Egypt, and not from those of Babylonia and Assyria,
that we henceforth have to look for light and information.
</p>

<p>
No traditions of a deluge had been preserved among
the Egyptians. They believed, however, that there was
a time when the greater part of mankind had been
destroyed by the angry gods. A myth told how men
had once uttered hostile words against their creator Ra,
the Sun-God, who accordingly sent the goddess Hathor
to slay them, so that the earth was covered with their
blood as far as the town of Herakleopolis. Then Ra
drank 7,000 cups of wine, made from the fruits of Egypt
and mingled with the blood of the slain; his heart
rejoiced, and he made an oath that he would not destroy
mankind again. Rain filled the wells, and Ra went
forth to fight against his human foes. Their bows were
broken and themselves slaughtered, and the god returned
victorious to heaven, where he created Paradise
and the people of the stars. This myth agrees with
another, according to which mankind had emanated
from the eyes of Ra, though there was a different legend
of the creation, which asserted that all men, with the
exception of the negroes, had sprung from the tears of
the two deities Horus and Sekhet.
</p>

<pb n='050'/><anchor id='Pg050'/>

<p>
When Abraham went down into Egypt the empire
was already very old. Its history begins with Menes,
who united the independent states of the Nile valley
into a single kingdom, and established his capital at
Memphis. The first six dynasties of kings, who reigned
1,478 years, represent what is called the Old Empire. It
was under the monarchs of the fourth dynasty that the
pyramids of Gizeh were built; and at no time during its
later history did the art and culture of Egypt reach
again so high a level as it did under the Old Empire.
With the close of the sixth dynasty came a period of
disaster and decline. When Egypt again emerged into
the light of history it was under the warrior princes of
the twelfth dynasty. The capital had been shifted to
the new city of Thebes, in the south, a new god, Amun,
presided over the Egyptian deities, and the ruling class
itself differed in blood and features from the men of the
Old Empire. Henceforth Egyptian art was characterised
by a stiff conventionality wholly unlike the freedom and
vigour of the art of the early dynasties; the government
became more autocratic; and the obelisk took the
place of the pyramid in architecture. But the Middle
Empire, as it has been termed, did not last long.
Semitic invaders from Canaan and Arabia overran the
country, and established their seat at Zoan or Tanis.
For 511 years they held the Egyptians in bondage,
though the native princes, who had taken refuge in the
south, gradually acquired more and more power, until at
last, under the leadership of Aahmes or Amosis, the
founder of the eighteenth dynasty, they succeeded in
driving the hated foreigners out. These foreigners are
known to history as the Hyksos or Shepherds, Hyksos being the
Egyptian <foreign rend='italic'>hik shasu</foreign>, <q>prince of the Shasu,</q> or
<pb n='051'/><anchor id='Pg051'/>
<q>Beduins.</q> The name which they bear upon the monuments
is Menti.
</p>

<p>
It must have been while the Hyksos monarchs were
holding their court at Zoan that Abraham entered the
land. He found there men of Semitic blood, like himself,
and speaking a Semitic language. A welcome was
assured him, and he had no need of an interpreter. But
the Hyksos kings had already begun to assume Egyptian
state and to adopt Egyptian customs. In place of
the Semitic <foreign rend='italic'>shalat</foreign>, <q>ruler,</q> the title by which
their first leaders had been known, they had borrowed the
Egyptian title of Pharaoh. Pharaoh appears on the
monuments as <foreign rend='italic'>pir-aa</foreign>, <q>great house,</q> the palace in
which the king lived being used to denote the king himself,
just as in our own time the <q>porte</q> or gate of the
palace has become synonymous with the Turkish Sultan.
</p>

<p>
By the time that Joseph was sold into Egypt there
was little outward difference between the court at Zoan
and the court of the native princes at Thebes. The
very names and titles borne by the Hyksos officials had
become Egyptian; and though they still regarded the
god Set as the chief object of their worship, they had
begun to rebuild the Egyptian temples, and pay honour
to the Egyptian deities. Potiphar, to whom Joseph was
sold, bore a purely Egyptian name, meaning <q>the gift of
the risen one,</q> while the name of Potipherah, the high
priest of On, whose daughter, Asenath, was married by
Joseph, is equally Egyptian, and signifies <q>the gift of the
Sun-God.</q> The Sun-God was the special deity of On;
to him the great temple of the city was dedicated, and
the name by which the place was known to the Greeks
was Heliopolis, <q>the city of the sun.</q> It was the city
whose name is played upon in Isaiah xix. 18, where
<pb n='052'/><anchor id='Pg052'/>
the prophet declares that in the day when Egypt shall
be converted to the Lord, <q>the City of the Sun</q>
(<foreign rend='italic'>'ir ha-kheres</foreign>)
shall become <q>the city of the destruction</q>
of idols (<foreign rend='italic'>'ir ha-heres</foreign>). Jeremiah, too, plays similarly
upon the name, when he says that Nebuchadnezzar,
<q>shall break also the images of Beth-Shemesh (the
house of the Sun-God) that is in the land of Egypt</q>
(Jer. xliii. 13); while Ezekiel changes the Egyptian word
On into the Hebrew <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>aven</foreign>,
<q>nothingness,</q> and prophesies
that <q>the young men of Aven shall fall by the sword</q>
(Ezek. xxx. 17). The ruins of On are within an afternoon's
drive of Cairo: but nothing remains of the city
except mounds of earth, and a solitary obelisk that once
stood in front of the great temple of the sun, and had
been reared by Usertasen I, of the twelfth dynasty, a
thousand years before the daughter of its priest became
the wife of Joseph. The name of this daughter, Asenath,
is the Egyptian 'Snat.
</p>

<p>
We are told that when the Pharaoh had made
Joseph <q>ruler over all the land of Egypt</q> he gave him
a new name, Zaphnath-paaneah (Gen. xli. 45). According
to Dr. Brugsch, this name is the Egyptian <foreign rend='italic'>Za pa-u
nt pa-aa-ankh</foreign>, <q>governor of the district of the place of
life,</q> that is, of the district in which the Israelites afterwards
built the towns of Raamses and Pithom, and in
which the land of Goshen seems to have been situated.
In after times Egyptian legend confounded Joseph with
Moses, and changing the divine name which formed the
first element in his into that of the Egyptian god Osiris,
called him Osar-siph. The Jewish historian, Josephus,
has preserved for us the story which made Osar-siph the
leader of the Israelites in their flight from Egypt.
</p>

<p>
The seven years' famine, which Joseph predicted, is a
<pb n='053'/><anchor id='Pg053'/>
rare occurrence in Egypt. In a country where rain is
almost unknown, the fertility of the fields depends upon
the annual inundation of the Nile when swollen by the
melting snows of Abyssinia. It is only where the
waters can penetrate, or can be led by canals and
irrigating machines, that the soil is capable of supporting
vegetation; but wherever this takes place the mud they
bring with them is so fertilising that the peasantry
frequently grow three luxuriant crops on the same piece
of ground during the same year. For the inundation to
fail in any single year is not common; for it to fail
seven years running is a most unusual event. The last
recorded time when there was a seven years' failure of
the river, and a consequent famine, was in <hi rend='smallcaps'>A.D.</hi> 1064-1071,
under the reign of the Khalif El-Mustansir Billah.
A similar failure must have taken place in the age of
the twelfth dynasty, since Ameni, an officer of King
Usurtasen I, who has engraved the history of his life at
the entrance of his tomb among the cliffs of Beni-Hassan,
states that <q>no one was hungry in my days,
not even in the years of famine. For I had tilled all
the fields of the district of Mah, up to the southern and
northern frontiers. Thus I prolonged the life of its
inhabitants, and preserved the food which it produced.
No hungry man was in it. I distributed equally to the
widow as to the married woman. I did not prefer the
great to the humble in all that I gave away.</q><note place='foot'>Brugsch,
<q>History of Egypt</q> (Eng. Tr.) I, p. 158.</note>
</p>

<p>
Another long famine of the same kind happened at a
later date, and may possibly be that against which
Joseph provided in Northern Egypt. The sepulchral
tablet of a nobleman, called Baba, far away at El-Kab
in Southern Egypt, informs us of the fact. In this the
<pb n='054'/><anchor id='Pg054'/>
dead man is made to say: <q>When a famine arose,
lasting many years, I distributed corn to the city each
year of famine.</q>
</p>

<p>
Baba is supposed to have lived shortly before the
establishment of the eighteenth dynasty; and this
would agree very well with the date which we must
assign to Joseph. As we shall see in the next chapter,
we now know the exact period of Egyptian history at
which the Exodus must have taken place; and if we
count 430 years, <q>the sojourning of the children of Israel
who dwelt in Egypt</q> (Exod. xii. 40), back from this,
we shall be brought to the reign of the Hyksos king
Apophis or Apepi, the very king, in fact, under whom,
according to ancient authors, Joseph was raised to be
the <foreign rend='italic'>adon</foreign>, or second ruler of the state. It was not until
the Hyksos were driven out of the country, and Aahmes,
the founder of the eighteenth dynasty, was pursuing with
bitter hatred both them and their friends that <q>there
arose up a new king over Egypt, which knew not Joseph.</q>
</p>

<p>
The earlier history of Joseph in the house of Potiphar
finds a curious parallel in an old Egyptian romance,
known as the Tale of the Two Brothers, which was composed
by a scribe named Enna in the thirteenth century
<hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> Anepu, it is there said, sent his younger brother,
Bata, from the field where they were working, to fetch
corn from the village. <q>And the young brother found
the wife of his elder brother occupied in braiding her
hair. And he said to her, <q>Rise up, give me seed-corn,
that I may return to the field, for thus has my elder
brother enjoined me, to return without delay.</q> The
woman said to him, <q>Go in, open the chest, that thou
mayest take what thine heart desires, otherwise my
locks will fall by the way.</q> And the youth entered
<pb n='055'/><anchor id='Pg055'/>
into the stable, and took thereout a large vessel, for it
was his wish to carry away much seed-corn. And he
loaded himself with wheat and grains of durra, and went
out with it. Then she said unto him, <q>How great is the
burden on thine arm?</q> He said to her, <q>Two measures
of durra and three measures of wheat, making together
five measures, which rest on my arms.</q> Thus he spake
to her. But she spake to the youth and said, <q>How
great is thy strength! Well have I remarked thy
vigour every time.</q> And her heart knew him!...
And she stood up and laid hold of him, and she said
to him, <q>Come, let us enjoy an hour's rest. The most
beautiful things shall be thy portion, for I will prepare
for thee festal garments.</q> Then the youth became like
the panther of the south for rage, on account of the
evil word which she had spoken to him; but she was
afraid beyond all measure. And he spoke to her and
said, <q>Thou, O woman, hast been to me like a mother,
and thy husband like a father, for he is older than I, so
that he might have been my parent. Why this so great
sin, that thou hast spoken to me? Say it not to me
another time, then will I not tell it this time, and no
word of it shall come out of my mouth about it to any
man whatsoever.</q> And he loaded himself with his
burden, and went out into the field. And he went to
his elder brother, and they completed their day's work.
When it was now evening, the elder brother returned
home to his dwelling. And his young brother followed
behind his oxen, which he had laden with all the good
things of the field, driving them before him, to prepare
for their resting-place in the stable in the village. And,
behold, the wife of his elder brother was afraid because
of the word which she had spoken, and she took a jar of
<pb n='056'/><anchor id='Pg056'/>
fat, and she made herself like one to whom an evil-doer
had offered violence. She wished thereby to say
to her husband, <q>Thy young brother has offered
me violence.</q> And her husband returned home at
evening, according to his daily custom, and entered
into his house, and found his wife stretched out and
suffering from injury. She gave him no water for his
hands, according to her custom. And the lamp was
not lighted, so that the house was in darkness. But she
lay there and vomited. And her husband spoke to her
thus, <q>Who has had to do with thee? Lift thyself up!</q>
She said to him, <q>No one has had to do with me except
thy young brother; for when he came to take seed-corn
for thee, he found me sitting alone, and he said to
me, <q>Come, let us make merry an hour and rest! Let
down thy hair!</q> Thus he spake to me; but I did not
listen to him (but said), <q>See, am I not thy mother, and
is not thy elder brother like a father to thee?</q> Thus I
spoke to him; but he did not hearken to my speech, and
used force with me, that I might not make a report to
thee. Now, if thou allowest him to live, I will kill
myself.</q></q><note place='foot'>Brugsch,
<q>History of Egypt</q> (Eng. Tr.), I, pp. 309-311.</note>
Anepu then took a knife, and went out to
kill his brother. The cows, however, warned Bata of
his danger, and the Sun-God came to his aid, and set a
river full of crocodiles between himself and Anepu.
When Anepu eventually learned the real truth, he
hurried back to his house, and put his wife to
death.
</p>

<p>
No name like that of Goshen, where the Israelites
were settled by order of the Pharaoh, has as yet been
discovered upon the monuments. Goshen, however,
could not have been far from the north-eastern frontier
<pb n='057'/><anchor id='Pg057'/>
of Egypt, and from Genesis xlvii. 11, we learn that it
was in the land of Rameses. Now, Dr. Brugsch has
shown that Ramses, or Rameses, was the title given to
Zoan by Ramses II, when he raised it anew from the
ruins in which it had lain since the expulsion of the
Hyksos, and filled it again with stately edifices.
Goshen consequently must have been in the neighbourhood
of Zoan, as, indeed, we might expect, since
Joseph's family would naturally be settled not far from
the capital and the residence of the powerful minister.
It was from hence that Jacob's body, after being
embalmed, as was customary in Egypt, was carried to
the old family tomb at Hebron; and we can therefore
understand why Zoan and Hebron were brought into
such close relation in the well-known passage of
Numbers (xiii. 22) where it is said that <q>Hebron was
built seven years before Zoan in Egypt.</q> Hebron and
Zoan were the two points around which centred the
patriarchal history which is set before us in the Book of
Genesis.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='058'/><anchor id='Pg058'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter III. The Exodus out of Egypt.</head>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>Egypt during the sojourn of the Israelites.&mdash;The travels of an
Egyptian officer through Palestine before the time of Joshua.&mdash;Recent excavations at
Tel el-Maskhûta.&mdash;Discovery of the treasure-chambers built by the
Israelites.&mdash;Date
of the Exodus fixed.&mdash;Origin of the word Jĕhovâh.&mdash;The rite of
circumcision.&mdash;Origin of the name Moses.&mdash;Illustrations of Hebrew law
and ritual from Phœnician and Assyrian monuments.&mdash;Tablet describing
the duties of a priest of Bel.&mdash;The sacrificial tariff of Marseilles.&mdash;Phœnician
texts found in Cyprus.</hi>
</quote>

<p>
The expulsion of the Hyksos conquerors of Egypt,
while it brought oppression and slavery to their Semitic
kindred who were left behind, inaugurated an era of
conquest and glory for the Egyptians themselves. The
war against the Asiatics which had begun in Egypt was
carried into Asia, and under Thothmes III and other
great monarchs of the eighteenth dynasty the Egyptian
armies traversed Palestine and Syria, and penetrated as
far as the Euphrates. The tribes of Canaan paid tribute;
the Amorites or <q>hill-men</q> were led into captivity; and
the combined armies of Hittites and Phœnicians were
defeated in the plain of Megiddo. On the temple-walls
of Karnak at Thebes, Thothmes III (<hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 1600) gives a
list of the Canaanitish towns which had submitted to his
arms. Among them we read the names of Zarthan and
Beroth, of Beth-Anoth and Gibeah, of Migdol and Ophrah,
of Taanach and Jibleam, of Shunem and Chinneroth, of
Hazor and Laish, of Merom and Kishon, of Abel and
Sharon, of Joppa and Achzib, of Beyrut and Accho, of
<pb n='059'/><anchor id='Pg059'/>
Heshbon and Megiddo, of Hamath and Damascus. One
of the conquered places bears the curious name of
Jacob-el, <q>Jacob the God,</q> while mention is made of
the Negeb, or <q>southern district,</q> which afterwards
formed part of the territory of Judah.
</p>

<p>
Two centuries later, when the troublous times which
saw the close of the eighteenth dynasty had ushered in
the nineteenth, the same districts had again to be
overrun by the Egyptian kings. Once more victories
were gained over the powerful Hittites, in their fortress of
Kadesh, on the Orontes, and over the tribes of Palestine.
Seti I, the father of Ramses II, records among his conquests
Beth-Anoth and Kirjath-Anab<note place='foot'>Called Anab,
<q>(the city of) grapes,</q> in Josh. xi. 21.</note> in the south, as
well as Zor or Tyre. Ramses II himself, the Sesostris of
the Greeks, battled for long years against the Hittites on
the plains of Canaan, and established a line of Egyptian
fortresses as far north as Damascus. The tablets which
he engraved at the mouth of the Dog River, near
Beyrût, still remain to testify to his victories and campaigns.
Representations were sculptured on the walls
of Thebes of the forts of <q>Tabor, in the land of the
Amorites,</q> of Merom and of Salem; and the capture of
the revolted city of Ashkelon was celebrated both in
sculpture and in song.
</p>

<p>
But the most interesting record which has come down
to us from his reign is the account given by a <foreign rend='italic'>mohar</foreign>, or
military officer, of his travels through Palestine, at a time
when the country was nominally tributary to Egypt. The
<foreign rend='italic'>mohar</foreign> made his tour during the latter part of the reign
of Ramses II, the oppressor of the Israelites, so that the
account he has given of Canaan shows us what it was
like shortly before its conquest by Joshua. He journeyed
<pb n='060'/><anchor id='Pg060'/>
as far north as Aleppo in a chariot, which is more than a
traveller in Palestine could do now, and describes how
his clothes were stolen one night, and how his own
groom, or <q>muleteer,</q> joined the robbers. Among the
places he visited were the Phœnician cities of Gebal,
famous for its shrine of Ashtoreth, Beyrût, Sarepta, Sidon,
and Tyre, which he says was built on an island in the
sea, drinking-water being conveyed to it in boats. Old
Tyre, on the continent opposite, seems to have been
recently burnt. Hamath, Timnah, Hazor, Tabor,
Horonaim, and perhaps Adullam, were also visited, and
mention is made not only of the ford of the Jordan, near
Beth-Shean, but also of <q>a passage</q> in front of the city
of Megiddo, which had to be crossed before the town
could be entered. Joppa, the modern Jaffa, was surrounded
with gardens of date-palms, which have now
been supplanted by oranges. The road, however, was
not always good. In one place the <foreign rend='italic'>mohar</foreign> had to
<q>drive along the edge of the precipice, on the slippery
height, over a depth of 2,000 cubits, full of rocks and
boulders;</q> while at another time his groom broke the
chariot in pieces by driving over a slippery path, and
necessitated the repair of the injured carriage by <q>the
iron-workers</q> at the nearest smithy. Already, therefore,
it is clear, Palestine possessed plenty of smithies at
which iron was forged.
</p>

<p>
That Ramses II was the Pharaoh of the oppression,
has long been suspected by Egyptian scholars. The
accounts of the wars of himself and his predecessors in
Canaan show that up to the date of his death that
country was not yet inhabited by the Israelites. Not
only is no mention made of them, but the history of the
Book of Judges precludes our supposing that Palestine
<pb n='061'/><anchor id='Pg061'/>
could have been an Egyptian province after the
Israelitish conquest. It must have ceased to be
tributary to the Pharaohs before it was entered by
Joshua. Moreover, the name of the city of Ramses
(Raamses) built by the Israelites in Egypt points unmistakeably
to the reign of the great Ramses II himself.
As has already been observed, the name was given to
Zoan after its reconstruction by this monarch, whose
grandfather, Ramses I, was the first Egyptian king who
bore the name. As Ramses I reigned but a very few
years, while his successor, Seti I, associated his son,
Ramses II, with him on the throne when the latter was
but twelve years old or thereabouts, it could only have
been during his long reign of sixty-seven years that
Ramses II brought the name by which he had been
christened into vogue. It is possible that those Egyptian
scholars are right who see the Hebrews in a certain class
of foreigners called Aperiu, and employed by Ramses II
to work at his monuments; if so, we should have
another proof that the Exodus could not have taken
place until after his death. The identification, however,
is rendered very doubtful by the fact, that long after
the time of Ramses II, a document of the reign of
Ramses III speaks of 2,083 Aperiu as settlers in
Heliopolis, and describes them as <q>knights, sons of the
kings, and noble lords of the Aperiu, settled people,
who dwell in this place.</q> If, therefore, the Aperiu were
really the Hebrews, we should have to suppose that
some of them who had obtained offices of honour and
influence in Egypt remained behind in Heliopolis, the
city of Joseph's wife, when their poorer and oppressed
kinsmen followed Moses and Aaron into the desert in
search of the Promised Land.
</p>

<pb n='062'/><anchor id='Pg062'/>

<p>
However this may be, the question as to the date of
the Exodus, and consequently as to the Pharaoh of the
oppression, has now been finally set at rest by the excavations
recently undertaken at Tel el-Maskhûta. Tel
el-Maskhûta is the name of some large mounds near
Tel el-Kebîr and other places which were the scene of
the late war; and M. Naville, who has excavated them
for the Egyptian Exploration Fund, has found inscriptions
in them which show not only that they represent
an ancient city whose religious name was Pithom, while
its civil name was Succoth, but also that the founder of
the city was Ramses II. In Greek times the city was
called Heroöpolis, or Ero, from the Egyptian word <foreign rend='italic'>ara</foreign>,
<q>a store-house,</q> reminding us that Pithom and Raamses,
which the Israelites built for the Pharaoh, were
<q>treasure-cities</q> (Exod. i. 11). M. Naville has even
discovered the treasure-chambers themselves. They
are very strongly constructed, and divided by brick
partitions from eight to ten feet thick, the bricks being
sun-baked, and made some with and some without
straw. In these strawless bricks we may see the work
of the oppressed people when the order came: <q>Thus
saith the Pharaoh, I will not give you straw.</q>
</p>

<p>
The treasure-chambers occupy almost the whole area
of the old city, the walls of which are about 650 feet
square and 22 feet thick. Its name Pithom&mdash;in
Egyptian Pa-Tum&mdash;signifies the city of the Setting
Sun; and since it had another name, Succoth, we can
now understand how it was that the Israelites started
on their march not from Goshen, but from Succoth
(Ex. xiii. 20), that is, from the very place where they
had been working. Etham, their next stage, seems to
be the Egyptian fortress of Khetam, while Pi-hahiroth
<pb n='063'/><anchor id='Pg063'/>
(Ex. xiv. 2), is probably Pi-keheret, which is mentioned
in an inscription found at Tel el-Maskhûta as somewhere
in the neighbourhood of the canal that led from
the Nile to the Red Sea.
</p>

<p>
The Pharaoh under whom the Exodus actually took
place could not have been Ramses II himself, but his
son and successor, Meneptah II, who ascended the
throne about <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 1325. His reign lasted but a short
time, and it was disturbed not only by the flight of the
Children of Israel, but also by a great invasion of
Northern Egypt by the Libyans, which was with difficulty
repulsed. This took place in his fifth year. Three
years later a report was sent to him by one of his
officials stating that <q>the passage of tribes of the Shasu
(or Beduins) from the land of Edom had been effected
through the fortress of Khetam, which is situated in
Succoth (Thuku), to the lakes of the city of Pithom,
which are in the land of Succoth, in order that they
might feed themselves and their herds on the possessions
of the Pharaoh.</q> The lakes of Pithom must be those of
Bâlah and Timsah, on which Ismailia now stands, not
far from Tel el-Maskhûta, and Khetam is the Etham of
Scripture. It is possible that Timsah, <q>the lake of
crocodiles,</q> is the <foreign rend='italic'>yâm sûph</foreign>, or <q>sea of papyrus
reeds,</q> of Scripture, which the translators of the Septuagint
erroneously identified with the Red Sea.
</p>

<p>
Among the incidents connected with the deliverance
of the Israelites are two which especially deserve
notice. When God appointed Moses to his mission of
leading his enslaved brethren out of Egypt, He at the
same time revealed Himself by the name of <q>Jehovah,</q>
the special name by which He was henceforth to be
known to the Children of Israel. It is unfortunate that
<pb n='064'/><anchor id='Pg064'/>
this sacred name has descended to the readers of the
Authorised Version of the Old Testament in a corrupt
and barbarous form. The Hebrew alphabet was designed
to express consonants only, not vowels; these
were supplied by the reader from his knowledge of the
language and its pronunciation. As long as Hebrew
was still spoken, there was little difficulty in doing this;
but the case was changed when it ceased to be a living
language. A traditional pronunciation of the sacred
records was preserved in the synagogues; but it necessarily
differed in many respects from the pronunciation
which had actually been once in use, and was itself
in danger of being forgotten or altered. To avoid
such a danger, therefore, the so-called Masoretes, or
Jewish scribes, in the sixth century after the Christian
era, invented a system of symbols which should represent
the pronunciation of the Hebrew of the Old Testament
as read, or rather chanted, at the time in the great
synagogue of Tiberias in Palestine.<note place='foot'>The invention
of the existing Masoretic system of vowel-points and accents is ascribed
to Mokha of Tiberias (<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 570) and his son Moses,
who are said to have based it on a system invented shortly before by Akha
the Babylonian. Only a very few MSS. are known written in the Babylonian
system of punctuation.</note> It is in accordance
with this Masoretic mode of pronunciation that Hebrew
is now taught. But there was one word which the Masoretes
of Tiberias either could not or would not pronounce.
This was the national name of the God of
Israel. Though used so freely in the Old Testament, it
had come to be regarded with superstitious reverence
before the time when the Greek translation of the
Septuagint was made, and in this translation, accordingly,
the word <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>Kyrios</foreign>, <q>Lord,</q> is substituted
for it wherever it occurs. The New Testament writers naturally
<pb n='065'/><anchor id='Pg065'/>
followed the custom of the Septuagint and of their
age, and so also did the Masoretes of Tiberias. Wherever
the holy name was met with, they read in place of it
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Adônai</foreign>,
<q>Lord,</q> and hence, when supplying vowel-symbols
to the text of the Old Testament they wrote the
vowels of <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Adônai</foreign>
under the four consonants, Y H V H, which composed it.
This simply meant that <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Adônai</foreign>
was to be read wherever the sacred name was found. In
ignorance of this fact, however, the scholars who first
revived the study of Hebrew in modern Europe imagined
that the vowels of <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Adônai</foreign>
(<hi rend='italic'>ă</hi> or <hi rend='italic'>ĕ</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>o</hi>, and <hi rend='italic'>â</hi>) were intended
to be read along with the consonants below which they
stood. The result was the hybrid monster <hi rend='italic'>Yĕhovâh</hi>. In
passing into England the word became even more
deformed. In German the sound of <hi rend='italic'>y</hi> is denoted by the
symbol <hi rend='italic'>j</hi>, and the German symbol, but with the utterly
different English pronunciation attached to it, found its
way into the English translations of the Old Testament
Scriptures.
</p>

<p>
There are two opinions as to what was the actual
pronunciation of the sacred name while Hebrew was
still a spoken language. On the one hand, we may
gather from the contemporary Assyrian monuments that
it was pronounced <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Yahu</foreign>.
Wherever an Israelitish name
is met with in the cuneiform inscriptions which, like
Jehu or Hezekiah, is compounded with the divine title,
the latter appears as <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Yahu</foreign>,
Jehu being <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Yahua</foreign>, and
Hezekiah <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Khazaki-yahu</foreign>.
Even according to the Masoretes it must be read
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Yeho</foreign>
(that is, <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Yăhu</foreign>) when it forms
part of a proper name. The early Gnostics, moreover,
when they transcribed it in Greek characters, wrote
<foreign rend='italic'>Iaô</foreign>,
that is, <foreign rend='italic'>Yahô</foreign>. On the other hand, the four consonants,
Y H V H, can hardly have been pronounced otherwise
<pb n='066'/><anchor id='Pg066'/>
than as <foreign rend='italic'>Yahveh</foreign>, and this pronunciation is supported by
the two Greek writers Theodoret and Epiphanios, who
say that the word was sounded <foreign rend='italic'>Yavé</foreign>.
The form <foreign rend='italic'>Yahveh</foreign>, however, is
incompatible with the form <foreign rend='italic'>Yahu</foreign>
(<foreign rend='italic'>Yeho</foreign>),
which appears in proper names; and it has been maintained
that it is due to one of those plays on words, of
which there are so many examples in the Old Testament.
The spelling with a final <hi rend='italic'>h</hi> was adopted, it has been
supposed, in order to remind the reader of the Hebrew
verb which signifies <q>to be,</q> and to which there seems to
be a distinct allusion in Exod. iii. 14.<note place='foot'>A coin from Gaza,
of the fourth century <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>, is now in the British
Museum, on one side of which is the figure of the Canaanitish Baal in a
chariot of fire, but otherwise with the attributes of the Greek Zeus, and with
the word YHU (<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, Yahu or Yeho) written
above him in old Phœnician letters.</note>
</p>

<p>
We must now turn to a second incident which is
specially connected with the deliverance out of Egypt.
This is the rite of circumcision, which was observed in
so solemn a manner at the moment when the Israelites
had at last crossed the Jordan and were preparing to
attack the Canaanites. It was a rite which had been
practised by the Egyptians from the most remote times,
and had been communicated by them, according to
Herodotus, to the Ethiopians. Josephus tells us that
the rite was also practised by the Arabs, to whom
Herodotus adds the Syrians of Phœnicia, as well as the
Kolkhians and the Hittites of Kappadokia. A similar
rite is found at the present day among many barbarous
tribes in different parts of the world, and distinguishes
not only the Jew but the Mohammedan as well.
</p>

<p>
The name of Moses seems to be of Egyptian derivation.
It would correspond to the Egyptian <foreign rend='italic'>mes</foreign>
or <foreign rend='italic'>mesu</foreign>,
<q>son,</q> which is borne by more than one Egyptian prince
<pb n='067'/><anchor id='Pg067'/>
at the period of the Exodus, and forms part of the name
of Ramses, or Ra-mesu, <q>the son of the sun.</q> The
Hebrew spelling of the word with a final <hi rend='italic'>h</hi> is designed to
recall the Hebrew <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>mashâh</foreign>, <q>to draw out</q>
or <q>deliver,</q> just as the spelling of the Septuagint, Môysês, was
influenced by the etymology given by Josephus, which
made it a compound of the Egyptian <foreign rend='italic'>mô</foreign>, <q>water,</q> and
<foreign rend='italic'>ysês</foreign>, <q>to rescue from a flood.</q> Such plays upon
words are common in ancient literature, and are still in favour
in the East, and we must be on our guard against
ascribing to them a scientific value which they do not
possess. The name <foreign rend='italic'>mesu</foreign>, <q>son,</q> would be an
appropriate one for a child who had been adopted by an
Egyptian lady, and who was brought up at the court of
the Pharaoh in <q>all the wisdom of the Egyptians.</q>
</p>

<p>
This chapter would be incomplete unless something
were said of the illustrations of the law and ritual of the
Israelites afforded by the monuments of the nations
around them. These illustrations are to be found among
the Phœnicians and the Assyrians. Among both we
find traces of sacrifices and institutions which offer many
parallels to the ordinances of the Mosaic Law. Besides
the Sabbaths already spoken of, the Babylonians and
Assyrians had various festivals and fasts, on which certain
rites had to be performed and certain sacrifices offered;
they knew of <q>peace-offerings</q> and of <q>heave-offerings,</q>
of the dedication of the first-born, and of sacrifices for
sin. The gods were carried in procession in <q>ships,</q>
which, as we learn from the sculptures, resembled in
form the Hebrew ark, and were borne on men's
shoulders by means of staves. In front of the image of
the god stood a table, on which showbread was laid; and
a distinction was drawn between the meal-offering and
<pb n='068'/><anchor id='Pg068'/>
the animal sacrifice. Certain unclean kinds of food were
forbidden, including the flesh of swine and <q>creeping
things;</q> and in the outer courts of the temples were large
lavers called <q>seas,</q> like the <q>sea</q> of Solomon's temple,
in which the worshippers were required to cleanse themselves.
Many of these regulations and rites came down
from the Accadian period.
</p>

<p>
As a specimen of the rites which had to be performed,
we may quote a portion of a tablet which
prescribes the duties of the priest in the great temple
of Bel at Babylon. The tablet begins: <q>In the
month Nisan, on the 2nd day, two hours after
nightfall, the priest must come and take of the waters of
the river, must enter into the presence of Bel, and change
his dress, must put on a ... robe in the presence
of Bel, and say this prayer: <q>O my lord, who in his
strength has no equal, O my lord, blessed sovereign, lord
of the world, speeding the peace of the great gods, the
lord who in his might destroys the strong, lord of kings,
light of mankind, establisher of trust, O Bel, thy
sceptre is Babylon, thy crown is Borsippa, the wide
heaven is the dwelling-place of thy liver.... O
lord of the world, light of the spirits of heaven, utterer of
blessings, who is there whose mouth murmurs not of thy
righteousness, or speaks not of thy glory, and celebrates
not thy dominion? O lord of the world, who dwellest in
the temple of the sun, reject not the hands that are
raised to thee, be merciful to thy city Babylon, to Beth-Saggil
thy temple, incline thy face, grant the prayers of
thy people the sons of Babylon.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
Our knowledge of the Phœnician ritual is largely
derived from a sacrificial tariff discovered at Marseilles
in 1845. The stone on which it is engraved is unfortunately
<pb n='069'/><anchor id='Pg069'/>
not perfect, but what is left of it runs thus: <q>In
the temple of Baal (the following tariff of offerings shall
be observed), which was prescribed (in the time of) the
judge ... Baal, the son of Bod-Tanit, the son of
Bod-(Ashmun, and in the time of Halzi-Baal), the judge,
the son of Bod-Ashmun, the son of Halzi-Baal and (their
comrades). For an ox as a full-offering, whether it be a
prayer-offering or a full thank-offering, the priests
(shall receive) ten shekels of silver for each beast, and if
it be a full-offering the priests shall receive besides this
(300 shekels' weight of flesh). And for a prayer-offering
they shall receive (besides) the small joints(?) and the
roast(?), but the skin and the haunches and the feet and
the rest of the flesh shall belong to the offerer. For a
bullock which has horns, but is not yet broken in and
made to serve, or for a stag, as a full-offering, whether it
be a prayer-offering or a full thank-offering, the priests
(shall receive) five shekels of silver (for each beast, and if
it be a full-offering) they shall receive besides this 150
shekels' weight of flesh; and for a prayer-offering the
small joints(?) and the roast(?); but the skin and the
haunches and the feet (and the rest of the flesh shall
belong to the offerer). For a sheep or a goat as a full-offering,
whether it be a prayer-offering or a full thank-offering,
the priests (shall receive) one shekel of silver
and two <foreign rend='italic'>sar</foreign> for each beast; and in the case of a
prayer-offering they shall have (besides this the small joints (?))
and the roast(?); but the skin and the haunches and the
feet and the rest of the flesh shall belong to the offerer.
For a lamb or a kid or a fawn as a full-offering, whether
it be a prayer-offering or a full thank-offering, the priests
(shall receive) three-fourths of a shekel of silver and
(two) <foreign rend='italic'>zar</foreign> (for each beast; and in the case of a
prayer-offering
<pb n='070'/><anchor id='Pg070'/>
they shall have) besides this the small joints(?)
and the roast(?); but the skin and the haunches and
the feet and the rest of the flesh shall belong to (the
offerer). For a bird, whether wild or tame, as a full-offering,
whether it be <foreign rend='italic'>shetseph</foreign> or
<foreign rend='italic'>khazuth</foreign>, the priests
(shall receive) three-fourths of a shekel of silver and two
<foreign rend='italic'>zar</foreign> for each bird; and (so much flesh besides). For a
bird, or for the offering of the first-born of an animal, or
for a meal-offering or for an offering with oil, the priests
(shall receive) ten pieces of gold for each.... In
the case of every prayer-offering which is offered to the
gods, the priests shall receive the small joints(?), and
the roast(?) and the prayer-offering ... for a
cake and for milk and for fat, and for every offering
which is offered without blood.... For every
offering which is brought by a poor man in cattle
or birds, the priests shall receive nothing ...
anything leprous or scabby or lean is forbidden, and
no one as regards that which he offers (shall taste
of) the blood of the dead. The tariff for each offering
shall be according to that which is prescribed in
this publication.... As for every offering which
is not prescribed in this table, and is not made
according to the regulations which (have been published
in the time of ... Baal, the son of
Bod-Tanit), and of Bod-Ashmun, the son of Halzi-Baal,
and of their comrades, every priest who accepts
the offering which is not included in that which is
prescribed in this table, shall be punished....
As for the property of the offerer who does not discharge
(his debt) for his offering (he also shall be punished).</q>
</p>

<p>
The words that are wanting in the document have been
partially supplied from the fragments of another copy of
<pb n='071'/><anchor id='Pg071'/>
the tariff found among the ruins of Carthage. It will be
observed that there is no mention in it of the sacrifice of
children, which, as we know, once played a large part in
the ritual of the Phœnicians. This is explained by the
fact that the tariff belongs to that later age, when Greek
and Roman influence had prevailed upon the Phœnician
colonists in the west to give up the horrible practice.
The place of the child is taken by the <foreign rend='italic'>'ayyâl</foreign> or stag.
</p>

<p>
The tariff of Marseilles and Carthage has lately been
supplemented by some Phœnician texts found in the
island of Cyprus, and written in black and red ink upon
small pieces of marble. One of these has both faces
inscribed, and a translation of its contents is worth giving.
On the first face we read: <q>Expenses of the month
Ethanim: On the new-moon of the month Ethanim, for
the gods of the new-moon two.... For the
architects who have built the temples of Ashtoreth, for
each house.... For the guardians of the sanctuary
and the overseers of the temple of Resheph 20....
For the men (who tend) the cattle in the
presence of the Holy Queen on this day....
For two boys two ... For two sacrifices ...
For two bakers who have baked the cakes for the (Holy)
Queen.... For the barbers, for their work,
two.... For the ten masons who have built
the foundations and the temples of the Sun-god ...
To Ebed-Ashmun, the principal scribe, who has been
sent on this day, three.... For the dogs and
their young....</q> On the other face we have: <q>On
the new-moon of the month Peûlat: For the gods of the
new-moon two.... For the masters of the days,
incense and peace-offering.... For the images of
the temple of the Sun-god and the other gods....
<pb n='072'/><anchor id='Pg072'/>
For Ebed-Bast of Carthage.... For the man
who has bought the withered plants(?).... For
the shepherds of the country two.... For the
<foreign rend='italic'>'almâth</foreign> and the 22
<foreign rend='italic'>'alâmôth</foreign>, with a sacrifice....
For the dogs and their young three....</q>
</p>

<p>
Here we evidently have an account of the payments
disbursed by the priests of a temple on particular days.
Resheph was a title of the Sun-god, and M. Clermont-Ganneau
has pointed out that his name still survives in
that of Arsûf, a ruined town to the north of Jaffa. The
cakes baked for Ashtoreth, <q>the Holy Queen,</q> are the
same as those which the Jewish men and women who
had fled to Egypt after the destruction of Jerusalem and
the murder of Gedaliah declared to Jeremiah that they
would still continue to offer to <q>the queen of heaven</q>
(Jer. xliv. 19). What is meant by the <q>dogs</q> is best
explained by Deuteronomy xxiii. 18, while the barbers
mentioned in the text were required to shave the priests.
Mention is also made of them in the Assyrian inscriptions
(see Lev. xix. 27, xxi. 5). The <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>'almâth</foreign>, or
<q>maiden</q>&mdash;a word which has acquired a special significance
in the Christian Church in consequence of its
having been used in Isaiah's prophecy of <q>the Virgin</q>
(Isa. vii. 14)&mdash;here seems to mean the chief singer
attached to the temple of Ashtoreth. The
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>'alâmôth</foreign> are
described in the sixty-eighth Psalm (ver. 25) as similarly
employed in the worship of Israel. As for the <q>Masters
of the Days,</q> they are the gods who, as among the
Assyrians, were believed to preside over the months of
the year. The month Ethanim, to which the first
account refers, is mentioned, it will be remembered, in
1 Kings viii. 2, as being the month in which the feast of
the dedication of Solomon's temple was held. That
<pb n='073'/><anchor id='Pg073'/>
temple had been built with the help of Phœnician
workmen, and it was therefore natural that the names of
the Phœnician months should have become known to the
Israelites in connection with it. The Israelites themselves
were still contented to speak of the months of the
year according to the order in which they came. It
was not until after the return from the Babylonish exile
that special names for the months were definitely
adopted, and that the Jews henceforth called them by
the Assyrian names they had heard in Babylonia.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='074'/><anchor id='Pg074'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter IV. The Moabite Stone and the Inscription of
Siloam.</head>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>The alphabet of Egyptian origin.&mdash;Discovery of the Moabite
Stone.&mdash;Translation
of the inscription.&mdash;Points of interest raised by the inscription.&mdash;Discovery
of the Siloam inscription.&mdash;The translation.&mdash;The date.&mdash;Its
bearing upon the topography of Jerusalem.</hi>
</quote>

<p>
Modern discovery has as yet thrown little contemporary
light on the period of Israelitish history which
extends from the conquest of Canaan to the time when
the kingdom of David was rent into the two monarchies
of Israel and Judah. The buried ruins of Phœnicia
have not yet been explored, and we have still to depend
on the statements of classical writers for what we know,
outside the Bible records, of Hiram the Tyrian king, the
friend of David and Solomon. It is certain, however,
that state archives already existed in the chief cities of
Phœnicia, and a library was probably attached to the
ancient temple of Baal, the Sun-god, at Tyre, which was
restored by Hiram. It was from the Phœnicians that
the Israelites, and the nations round about them, received
their alphabet. This alphabet was of Egyptian origin.
As far back as the monuments of Egypt carry us, we
find the Egyptians using their hieroglyphics to express
not only ideas and syllables, but also the letters of an
alphabet. Even in the remote epoch of the second
dynasty they already possessed an alphabet in which the
twenty-one simple sounds of the language were represented
by special hieroglyphic pictures. Such hieroglyphic
<pb n='075'/><anchor id='Pg075'/>
pictures, however, were employed only on the
public monuments; for books and letters and business
transactions the Egyptians made use of a running hand,
in which the original pictures had undergone great transformations.
This running hand is termed <q>hieratic,</q>
and it was from the hieratic forms of the Egyptian
letters that the Phœnician letters were derived.
</p>

<p>
We have already seen that the coast of the Delta was
so thickly peopled with Phœnician settlers as to have
acquired the name of Keft-ur, or Caphtor, <q>greater
Phœnicia;</q> and these settlers it must have been who
first borrowed the alphabet of their Egyptian neighbours.
For purposes of trade they must have needed some
kind of writing, by means of which they could communicate
with the natives of the country, and their business-like
instincts led them to adopt only the alphabet used
by the latter, and to discard all the cumbrous machinery
of ideographs and syllabic characters by which it was
accompanied. It was doubtless in the time of the
Hyksos that the Egyptian alphabet became Phœnician.
From the Delta it was handed on to the mother country
of Phœnicia, and there the letters received new names,
derived from objects to which they bore a resemblance and
which began with the sounds they represented. These
names, as well as the characters to which they belonged,
have descended to ourselves, for the Phœnician alphabet
passed first from the Phœnicians to the Greeks, then
from the Greeks to the Romans, and finally from the
Romans to the nations of modern Europe. The very
word <emph>alphabet</emph> is a living memorial of the fact, since it is
composed of <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>alpha</foreign> and
<foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>beta</foreign>, the Greek names of the two
first letters, and these names are simply the Phœnician
<foreign rend='italic'>aleph</foreign>, <q>an ox,</q> and
<foreign rend='italic'>beth</foreign>, <q>a house.</q> Just as in our own
<pb n='076'/><anchor id='Pg076'/>
nursery days it was imagined that we should remember
our lessons better if we were taught that <q>A was an
Archer who shot at a frog,</q> so the forms of the letters
were impressed on the memory of the Phœnician boys
by being likened to the head of an ox or the outline of
a house.
</p>

<p>
But before the alphabet was communicated to Greece
by the Phœnician traders, it had already been adopted
by their Semitic kinsmen in Western Asia. Excavations
in Palestine and the country east of the Jordan would
doubtless bring to light inscriptions compiled in it
much older than the oldest which we at present know.
Only a few years ago the gap between the time when
the Phœnicians first borrowed their new alphabet and
the time to which the earliest texts written in it belonged
was very great indeed. But during the last fifteen years
two discoveries have been made which help to fill it up,
and prove to us at the same time what may be found if
we will only seek.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/moabite.png' rend='width: 50%'>
    <head>The Moabite Stone, erected by King Mesha, at Dibon.</head>
    <figDesc>Illustration.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
One of these discoveries is that of the famous Moabite
Stone. In the summer of 1869, Dr. Klein, a German
missionary, while travelling in what was once the land
of Moab, discovered a most curious relic of antiquity
among the ruins of Dhibân, the ancient Dibon. This
relic was a stone of black basalt, rounded at the top,
two feet broad and nearly four feet high. Across it ran
an inscription of thirty-four lines in the letters of the
Phœnician alphabet. Dr. Klein unfortunately did not
realise the importance of the discovery he had made; he
contented himself with copying a few words, and endeavouring
to secure the monument for the Berlin Museum.
Things always move slowly in the East, and it was not
until a year later that the negociations for the purchase
<pb n='077'/><anchor id='Pg077'/>
of the stone were completed between the Prussian
Government on the one side and the Arabs and Turkish
pashas on the other. At length, however, all was
arranged, and it was agreed that the stone should be
handed over to the Germans for the sum of £80. At
this moment M. Clermont-Ganneau, a member of the
French Consulate at Jerusalem, with lamentable indiscretion,
sent men to take squeezes of the inscription,
and offered no less than £375 for the stone itself. At
once the cupidity of both Arabs and pashas was
aroused; the Governor of Nablûs demanded the treasure
for himself, while the Arabs, fearing it might be taken
from them, put a fire under it, poured cold water over it,
broke it in pieces, and distributed the fragments as
charms among the different families of the tribe. Thanks
to M. Clermont-Ganneau, most of these fragments
have now been recovered, and the stone, once more put
together, may be seen in the Museum of the Louvre at
Paris. The fragments have been fitted into their proper
places by the help of the imperfect squeezes taken
before the monument was broken.
</p>

<p>
When the inscription came to be read, it turned out
to be a record of Mesha, king of Moab, of whom we are
told in 2 Kings iii. that after Ahab's death he <q>rebelled
against the king of Israel,</q> and was vainly besieged
in his capital Kirharaseth by the combined armies
of Israel, Judah and Edom. Mesha describes the successful
issue of his revolt, and the revenge he took upon
the Israelites for their former oppression of his country.
The translation of the inscription is as follows:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
<q>I, Mesha, am the son of Chemosh-Gad, king of
Moab, the Dibonite. My father reigned over Moab
thirty years, and I reigned after my father. And I
<pb n='078'/><anchor id='Pg078'/>
erected this stone to Chemosh at Kirkha, a (stone of)
salvation, for he saved me from all despoilers, and made
me see my desire upon all my enemies, even upon Omri,
king of Israel. Now they afflicted Moab many days,
for Chemosh was angry with his land. His son succeeded
him; and he also said, I will afflict Moab. In
my days (Chemosh) said, (Let us go) and I will see my
desire on him and his house, and I will destroy Israel
with an everlasting destruction. Now Omri took the
land of Medeba, and (the enemy) occupied it in (his days
and in) the days of his son, forty years. And Chemosh
(had mercy) on it in my days; and I fortified Baal-Meon,
and made therein the tank, and I fortified Kiriathaim.
For the men of Gad dwelt in the land of
(Atar)oth from of old, and the king (of) Israel fortified
for himself Ataroth, and I assaulted the wall and captured
it, and killed all the warriors of the wall for the
well-pleasing of Chemosh and Moab; and I removed
from it all the spoil, and (offered) it before Chemosh in
Kirjath; and I placed therein the men of Siran and the
men of Mochrath. And Chemosh said to me, Go take
Nebo against Israel. (And I) went in the night, and I
fought against it from the break of dawn till noon, and
I took it and slew in all seven thousand (men, but I did
not kill) the women (and) maidens, for (I) devoted them
to Ashtar-Chemosh; and I took from it the vessels of
Yahveh, and offered them before Chemosh. And the
king of Israel fortified Jahaz and occupied it, when he
made war against me; and Chemosh drove him out
before (me, and) I took from Moab two hundred men,
all its poor, and placed them in Jahaz, and took it to
annex it to Dibon. I built Kirkha, the wall of the
forest, and the wall of the city, and I built the gates
<pb n='079'/><anchor id='Pg079'/>
thereof, and I built the towers thereof, and I built the
palace, and I made the prisons for the criminals within
the walls. And there was no cistern in the wall at
Kirkha, and I said to all the people, Make for yourselves,
every man, a cistern in his house. And I dug
the ditch for Kirkha by means of the (captive) men of
Israel. I built Aroer, and I made the road across the
Arnon. I built Beth-Bamoth, for it was destroyed; I
built Bezer, for it was cut (down) by the armed men of
Dibon, for all Dibon was now loyal; and I reigned from
Bikran, which I added to my land, and I built (Beth-Gamul)
and Beth-Diblathaim and Beth-Baal-Meon, and
I placed there the poor (people) of the land. And as to
Horonaim, (the men of Edom) dwelt therein (from of
old). And Chemosh said to me, Go down, make war
against Horonaim and take (it. And I assaulted it, and
I took it, and) Chemosh (restored it) in my days.
Wherefore I made ... year ... and I....</q>
</p>

<p>
The last line or two, describing the war against the
Edomites, is unfortunately lost beyond recovery. The
rest of the text, however, it will be seen, is pretty perfect,
and is full of interest to Biblical students. The whole
inscription reads like a chapter from one of the historical
books of the Old Testament. Not only are the phrases
the same, but the words and grammatical forms are, with
one or two exceptions, all found in Scriptural Hebrew.
We learn that the language of Moab differed less from
that of the Israelites than does one English dialect from
another. Perhaps the most interesting fact disclosed by
the inscription is that Chemosh, the national god of the
Moabites, had come to be regarded not only as the
supreme deity, but even as almost the only object of
their worship. Except in the passage which alludes to
<pb n='080'/><anchor id='Pg080'/>
the dedication of women and maidens to Ashtar-Chemosh,
Mesha speaks as a monotheist, and even here the
female Ashtar or Ashtoreth is identified with the supreme
male deity Chemosh. Like the Assyrian kings, moreover,
who ascribed their victories and campaigns to the
inspiration of the god Assur, Mesha ascribes his successes
to the orders of Chemosh. He uses, in fact,
the language of Scripture; as the Lord said to David,
<q>Go and smite the Philistines</q> (1 Sam. xxiii. 2), so
Chemosh is made to say to Mesha, <q>Go, take Nebo;</q>
and as God promised to <q>drive out</q> the Canaanites
before Israel, so Mesha declares that Chemosh drove
out Israel before him from Jahaz. Mesha even sets
up a stone of salvation to Chemosh, like Eben-ezer,
<q>the stone of help,</q> set up by Samuel (1 Sam. vii. 12);
and the statement that Chemosh had been <q>angry with
his land,</q> but had made Mesha <q>see his desire upon all
his enemies,</q> reminds us of the well-known passages in
which the Psalmist declares that <q>God shall let me see
my desire upon mine oppressors,</q> and the author of the
Book of Judges recounts how that <q>the anger of the
Lord was hot against Israel.</q>
</p>

<p>
The covenant name of the God of Israel itself occurs
in the inscription, spelt in exactly the same way as in
the Old Testament. Its occurrence is a proof, if any were
needed, that the superstition which afterwards prevented
the Jews from pronouncing it did not as yet exist. The
name under which God was worshipped in Israel was
familiar to the nations round about. Nay, more; we
gather that even after the attempt of Jezebel to introduce
the Baalim of Sidon into the northern kingdom,
Yahveh was still regarded as the national god, and that
the worship carried on at the high places, idolatrous and
<pb n='081'/><anchor id='Pg081'/>
contrary as it was to the law, was nevertheless performed
in His name. The high-place of Nebo, like so many of
the other localities mentioned in the inscription, is also
mentioned in the prophecy against Moab contained in
Isa. xv. xvi. It is even possible that the words of the
verse in the Book of Isaiah in which it is named have
undergone transposition, and that the true reading is,
<q>He is gone up to Dibon and to Beth-Bamoth to weep;
Moab shall howl over Nebo and over Medeba.</q> The
inscription informs us that Beth-Bamoth, <q>the house of
the high-places,</q> was the name of a place near Dibon,
the name of which appears in the last verse of Isaiah xv.
under the form of Dimon, the letter <hi rend='italic'>b</hi> being changed by
the prophet into <hi rend='italic'>m</hi>, in order to connect it with the word
<foreign rend='italic'>dâm</foreign>, <q>blood.</q> Kirkha, <q>the wall of the
forest,</q> the modern Kerak, is called Kir of Moab and Kir-haresh or
Kir-hareseth by Isaiah, and Kir-heres by Jeremiah,
which by a slight change of vocalisation would signify
<q>the wall of the forest.</q> The form Kir-haraseth is also
used in the Book of Kings.
</p>

<p>
The story told by the Stone, and the account of the
war against Moab given in the Bible, supplement one
another. Dr. Ginsburg has suggested that the deliverance
of Moab from Israel was brought about during the reign
of Ahaziah, the successor of Ahab, and that Joram, the
successor of Ahaziah, was subsequently driven out of
Jahaz, which lay on the southern side of the Arnon; but
that after this the tide of fortune turned, Joram summoned
his allies from Judah and Edom, ravaged Moab, and blockaded
Mesha in his capital of Kirkha. Then came the
sacrifice by Mesha of his eldest son on the wall of Kirkha&mdash;so
that <q>there was great indignation against Israel,</q> and
the allied forces retreated back <q>to their own land.</q>
</p>

<pb n='082'/><anchor id='Pg082'/>

<p>
The Moabite Stone shows us what were the forms of
the Phœnician letters used on the eastern side of the
Jordan in the time of Ahab. The forms employed in
Israel and Judah on the western side could not have
differed much; and we may therefore see in these venerable
characters the precise mode of writing employed
by the earlier prophets of the Old Testament. This
knowledge is of great importance for the correction and
restoration of corrupt passages, and more especially of
proper names, the spelling of which has been deformed
by copyists.
</p>

<p>
Just, however, as the writing of two persons at the
present day must differ, so also the writing of two
nations like the Moabites and Jews must have differed
to some extent. Moreover, there must have been some
distinction between the more cursive writing of a papyrus-roll
and the carefully cut letters of a public monument
like that of Mesha. Indeed, that such a distinction did
exist we have proof in a passage (Isa. viii. 1) which has
been mistranslated in the Authorised Version, but which
ought to be rendered: <q>Take thee a great slab, and
write upon it with the graving-tool of the people:
Hasten spoil, hurry booty.</q> Here words which were
afterwards to be made more emphatic by becoming the
name of one of Isaiah's children, were written in a way
that all could read, not in the running hand of a scroll,
but in the large clear characters of a public document.
What these characters exactly were, a recent discovery
has enabled us to learn.
</p>

<p>
Hebrew inscriptions of an early date have long been
sought for in vain. We knew of one or two inscribed
fragments from the neighbourhood of the Pool of
Siloam at Jerusalem, and of a few seals which might be
<pb n='083'/><anchor id='Pg083'/>
referred to the period before the Babylonish Captivity;
but, unfortunately, none of these could be assigned to a
definite date, and even the conclusion that some of
them were pre-exilic was after all little more than a
guess. The seals are usually distinguished by the
absence of any symbols or other devices, as well as by
a horizontal line drawn across the middle, which divides
the inscription into two halves. The proper names also
which occur on them are, in the majority of cases,
compounded with the sacred name Yahveh. Several of
these seals have been found in Babylonia and Mesopotamia,
and may therefore be regarded as memorials of
the Jewish exile. But the legends they bear are always
short, and consist of little else than proper names; and as
their date was uncertain, it was impossible to draw any
solid inferences from them as to the character of the
writing employed in Judah or Israel before the age of
Nebuchadnezzar.
</p>

<p>
It is quite otherwise now. An inscription of some
length has been discovered in Jerusalem itself, which is
certainly as old as the time of Isaiah, and may be
older still. In the summer of 1880, one of the native
pupils of Mr. Schick, a German architect long settled in
Jerusalem, was playing with some other lads in the
so-called Pool of Siloam, and while wading up a
channel cut in the rock which leads into the Pool,
slipped and fell into the water. On rising to the
surface, he noticed what looked like letters on the rock
which formed the southern wall of the channel. He
told Mr. Schick of what he had seen; and the latter, on
visiting the spot, found that an ancient inscription,
concealed for the most part by the water, actually
existed there.
</p>

<pb n='084'/><anchor id='Pg084'/>

<p>
The Pool is of comparatively modern construction, but
it encloses the remains of a much older reservoir, which,
like the modern one, was supplied with water through a
tunnel excavated in the rock. This tunnel communicates
with the so-called Spring of the Virgin, the only
natural spring of water in or near Jerusalem. It rises
below the walls of the city, on the western bank of the
valley of the Kidron; and the tunnel through which its
waters are conveyed is consequently cut through the
ridge, that forms the southern part of the Temple Hill.
The Pool of Siloam lies on the opposite side of this
ridge, at the mouth of the valley called that of the
Cheesemakers (Tyropœôn) in the time of Josephus, but
which is now filled up with rubbish, and in large part built
over. According to Lieutenant Conder's measurements,
the length of the tunnel is 1,708 yards; it does not,
however, run in a straight line, and towards the centre
there are two <foreign rend='italic'>culs de sac</foreign>, of which the inscription now
offers an explanation. At the entrance on the western
or Siloam side its height is about sixteen feet; but the
roof grows gradually lower, until in one place it is not
quite two feet above the floor of the passage.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/siloam.png' rend='width: 50%'>
    <head>The Siloam Inscription (tracing from a squeeze, taken 15th July,
1881, by Lieuts. Conder and Mantell, R. E.).</head>
    <figDesc>Illustration.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
The inscription occupies the under part of an artificial
tablet in the wall of rock, about nineteen feet from where
the conduit opens out upon the Pool of Siloam, and on the
right-hand side of one who enters it. After lowering
the level of the water, Mr. Schick endeavoured to take a
copy of it; but as not only the letters of the text, but
every flaw in the rock were filled with a deposit of lime
left by the water, all he could send to Europe was a
collection of unmeaning scrawls. Besides the difficulty
of distinguishing the letters, it was also necessary to sit
in the mud and water, and to work by the dim light of
<pb n='087'/><anchor id='Pg087'/>
a candle, as the place where the inscription is engraved
is perfectly dark. All this rendered it impossible for
anyone not acquainted with Phœnician palæography to
make an accurate transcript. The first intelligible copy
accordingly was made by Professor Sayce after several
hours of careful study; but this too contained several
doubtful characters, the real forms of which could only
be determined by the removal of the calcareous matter
with which they were coated. In March, 1881, six
weeks after Sayce's visit, Dr. Guthe arrived in Jerusalem,
and after making a more complete facsimile of the
inscription than had previously been possible, removed
the deposit of lime by means of an acid, and so revealed
the original appearance of the tablet. Letters which
had previously been concealed now became visible, and
the exact shapes of them all could be observed. First a
cast, and then squeezes of the text were taken; and the
scholars of Europe had at last in their hands an exact
copy of the old text.
</p>

<p>
The inscription consists of six lines, but several of the
letters composing it have unfortunately been destroyed
by the wearing away of the rock. The translation of it
is as follows:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
1. <q>(Behold) the excavation! Now this is the history
of the excavation. While the excavators were still
lifting up the pick, each towards his neighbour, and
while there were yet three cubits to (excavate, there was
heard) the voice of one man calling to his neighbour,
for there was an excess in the rock on the right hand
(and on the left). And after that on the day of
excavating the excavators had struck pick against pick,
one against the other, the waters flowed from the spring
to the Pool for a distance of 1,200 cubits. And (part)
<pb n='088'/><anchor id='Pg088'/>
of a cubit was the height of the rock over the head of the
excavators.</q>
</p>

<p>
The language of the inscription is the purest Biblical
Hebrew. There is only one word in it&mdash;that rendered
<q>excess</q>&mdash;which is new, and consequently of doubtful
signification. We learn from it that the engineering skill
of the day was by no means despicable. The conduit
was excavated in the same fashion as the Mont Cénis
tunnel of our own time, by beginning the work simultaneously
at the two ends; and, in spite of its windings,
the workmen almost succeeded in meeting in the
middle. They approached, indeed, so nearly to one
another, that the noise made by the one party in hewing
the rock was heard by the other, and the small piece of
rock which intervened between them was accordingly
pierced. This accounts for the two
<foreign rend='italic'>culs de sac</foreign> now
found in the centre of the channel; they represent the
extreme points reached by the two bands of excavators
before they had discovered that, instead of meeting,
they were passing by one another.
</p>

<p>
It is most unfortunate that the inscription contains no
indication of date; but the forms of the letters used
in it show that it cannot be very much later in age than
the Moabite Stone. Indeed, some of the letters exhibit
older forms than those of the Moabite Stone; but this
may be explained by the supposition that the scribes of
Jerusalem were more conservative, more disposed to
retain old forms, than the scribes of king Mesha. The
prevalent opinion of scholars is that the tunnel and
consequently the inscription in it were executed in the
reign of Hezekiah. According to the Chronicler (2 Chr.
xxxii. 30), Hezekiah <q>stopped the upper watercourse of
Gihon, and brought it straight down to the west side of
<pb n='089'/><anchor id='Pg089'/>
the city of David,</q> and we read in 2 Kings xx. 20, that <q>he
made a pool and a conduit, and brought water into the
city.</q> The object of the laborious undertaking is very
plain. The Virgin's Spring, the only natural source near
Jerusalem, lay outside the walls, and in time of war
might easily pass into the hands of the enemy. The
Jewish kings, therefore, did their best to seal up this
spring, which must be the Chronicler's <q>upper water-course
of Gihon,</q> and to bring its waters by subterranean
passages inside the city walls. Besides the tunnel which
contains the inscription another tunnel has been discovered,
which also communicates with the Virgin's
Spring. But it is tempting to suppose that the most
important of these&mdash;the tunnel which contains the inscription&mdash;must
be the one which Hezekiah made.
</p>

<p>
The supposition, however, is rendered uncertain by a
statement of Isaiah (viii. 6). While Ahaz, the father of
Hezekiah, was still reigning, Isaiah uttered a prophecy in
which he made allusion to <q>the waters of Shiloah that
go softly.</q> Now this can hardly refer to anything else
than the gently flowing stream which still runs through
the tunnel of Siloam. In this case the conduit would
have been in existence before the time of Hezekiah; and,
since we know of no earlier period when a great
engineering work of the kind could have been executed
until we go back to the reign of Solomon, it is possible
that the inscription may actually be of this ancient date.
The inference is supported by the name Shiloah, which
probably means <q>the tunnel,</q> and would have been given
to the locality in consequence of the conduit which here
pierced the rock. It was not likely that when David
and Solomon were fortifying Jerusalem, and employing
Phœnician architects upon great public buildings there,
<pb n='090'/><anchor id='Pg090'/>
they would have allowed the city to depend wholly upon
rain cisterns for its water supply. Since the inscription
calls the Pool of Siloam simply <q>the Pool,</q> we may
perhaps infer that no other reservoir of the kind was
in existence at the time; and yet in the age of Isaiah,
as we learn from Isa. xxii. 9, 11, there was not only <q>a
lower pool,</q> in contradistinction to <q>an upper one,</q> but
also <q>an old pool,</q> in contradistinction to a new one.
As Dr. Guthe's excavations have laid bare the remains
of four such pools in the neighbourhood of that of
Siloam, there is no difficulty in finding places for all
these reservoirs. But they could hardly have existed
when the Pool of Siloam was still known as simply <q>the
Pool,</q> nor could the name of Shiloah have well been
given to the locality if another tunnel, observed by Sir
Charles Warren on the eastern side of the Temple Hill,
had been already excavated. This second tunnel starts,
like the Siloam one, from the Virgin's Spring, and was
designed to bring the water of the spring within the
walls of the city. A shaft is cut for seventy feet into the
hill, where it meets another perpendicular shaft, which
rises for a height of fifty feet, and then meets a flight of
steps, which lead into a broad passage, ending in another
flight of steps and a vaulted chamber. Niches for lamps
were found here at intervals, intended to light the persons
who went to draw the water by means of a bucket. As
lamps of the Roman period were discovered in the
chamber, the tunnel must have been known and used up
to the time of the capture of Jerusalem by Titus, and it
is probably not older than the reign of Herod. In any
case, the comparative excellence of its workmanship
goes to show that it was made at a later date than
the tunnel of Siloam.
</p>

<pb n='091'/><anchor id='Pg091'/>

<p>
Whatever doubts, however, may still hang over the
date of the inscription, there can be no question that
it has thrown most important light on the topography
of Jerusalem in the period of the kings. It is now clear
that the modern city occupies very little of the same
ground as the ancient one; the latter stood entirely on
the rising ground to the east of the Tyropœôn valley,
the northern portion of which is at present occupied by
the mosque of Omar, while the southern portion is uninhabited.
The Tyropœôn valley itself must be the
Valley of the Son of Hinnom, where the idolaters of
Jerusalem burnt their children in the fire to Moloch. It
must be in the southern cliff of this valley that the tombs
of the kings are situated; the reason why they have
never yet been found being that they are buried under
the rubbish with which the valley is filled. Among the
rubbish must be the remains of the city which was
destroyed by Nebuchadnezzar, and whose ruins were
flung into the gorge below. Between the higher part
of the hill, now occupied by the mosque of Omar, and
its lower uninhabited portion, Dr. Guthe has discovered
traces of a valley which once ran into the valley of the
Kidron at right angles to it, not far from the Virgin's
Spring, and divided in old days the City of David from
the rest of the town. Here, as well as in the now
obliterated Valley of the Cheesemakers, there probably
still lie the relics of the dynasty of David; but we shall
only know the story they have to tell us when the
spade of the excavator has come to continue the discoveries
which the inscription of Siloam has begun.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='092'/><anchor id='Pg092'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter V. The Empire of the Hittites.</head>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>Discovery of traces of an ancient Hittite Empire.&mdash;Scripture
references to the
Hittites.&mdash;Professor Sayce's discovery.&mdash;The inscriptions at Hamath.&mdash;The
Hittite race.&mdash;Hittite art.</hi>
</quote>

<p>
Five years ago there was no one who suspected that a
great empire had once existed in Western Asia and
contended on equal terms with both Egypt and Assyria,
the founders of which were the little-noticed Hittites of
the Old Testament. Still less did any one dream that
these same Hittites had once carried their arms, their
art, and their religion to the shores of the Æegean, and
that the early civilisation of Greece and Europe was as
much indebted to them as it was to the Phœnicians.
</p>

<p>
The discovery was made in 1879. Recent exploration
and excavation had shown that the primitive art and
culture of Greece, as revealed, for example, by Dr.
Schliemann's excavations at Mykenæ, were influenced
by a peculiar art and culture emanating from Asia
Minor. Here, too, certain strange monuments had been
discovered, which form a continuous chain from Lydia in
the west to Kappadokia and Lykaonia in the east. The
best known of these are certain rock sculptures found at
Boghaz Keui and Eyuk, on the eastern side of the
Halys, and two figures in relief in the Pass of Karabel,
near Sardes, which the old Greek historian, Herodotus,
had long ago supposed to be memorials of the Egyptian
conqueror Sesostris, or Ramses II.
</p>

<pb n='093'/><anchor id='Pg093'/>

<p>
Meanwhile other discoveries were being made in lands
more immediately connected with the Bible. Scholars
had learned from the Egyptian inscriptions that before
the days of the Exodus the Egyptian monarchs had
been engaged in fierce struggles with the powerful nation
of the Hittites, whose two chief seats were at Kadesh
on the Orontes and Carchemish on the Euphrates,
and who were able to summon to their aid subject-allies
not only from Palestine, but also far away from
Lydia and the Troad, on the western coast of Asia
Minor. Ramses II himself, the Pharaoh of the oppression,
had been glad to make peace with his antagonists;
and the treaty, which provided, among other things, for
the amnesty of political offenders who had found a
shelter during the war among one or other of the two
combatants, was cemented by the marriage of the
Egyptian king with the daughter of his rival. A century
or two afterwards Tiglath-Pileser I of Assyria
found his passage across the Euphrates barred by the
Hittites of Carchemish and their Kolkhian mercenaries.
From this time forward the Hittites proved dangerous
enemies to the Assyrian kings in their attempts to
extend the empire towards the west, until at last in
<hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 717 Sargon succeeded in capturing their rich capital,
Carchemish, and in making it the seat of an Assyrian
satrap. Henceforth the Hittites disappear from history.
</p>

<p>
But they had already left their mark on the pages of
the Old Testament. The Canaanite who had betrayed
his fellow-citizens at Beth-el to the Israelites dared not
entrust himself to his countrymen, but went away <q>into
the land of the Hittites</q> (Judges i. 26). Solomon
imported horses from Egypt, which he sold to the
Syrians and the Hittites (1 Kings x. 28, 29), and when
<pb n='094'/><anchor id='Pg094'/>
God had sent a panic upon the camp of the Syrians
before Jerusalem, they had imagined that <q>the king of
Israel had hired against them the kings of the Hittites
and the kings of the Egyptians</q> (2 Kings vii. 6).
Kadesh itself, the southern Hittite capital, is mentioned
in a passage where the Hebrew text is unfortunately
corrupt (2 Sam. xxiv. 6). Here the Septuagint shows
us that the officers sent by David to number the people,
in skirting the northern frontier of his kingdom, came as
far as <q>Gilead and the land of the Hittites of Kadesh.</q>
In the extreme south of Palestine an offshoot of the
race had been settled from an early period. These are
the Hittites of whom we hear in Genesis in connection
with the patriarchs. Hebron was one of their cities,
and Hebron, we are told (Numb. xiii. 22), <q>was built
seven years before Zoan,</q> or Tanis, the capital of the
Hyksos conquerors of Egypt. This suggests that the
Hittites formed part of the Hyksos forces, and that
some of them, instead of entering Egypt, remained
behind in Southern Canaan. The suggestion is confirmed
by a statement of the Egyptian historian
Manetho, who asserts that Jerusalem was founded by
the Hyksos after their expulsion from Egypt; and
Jerusalem, it will be remembered, had, according to
Ezekiel (xvi. 3), a Hittite mother.
</p>

<p>
Another Hittite city in the south of Judah was
Kirjath-sepher, or <q>Booktown,</q> also known as Debir,
<q>the sanctuary,</q> a title which reminds us of that of
Kadesh, <q>the holy city.</q> We may infer from its name
that Kirjath-sepher contained a library stocked with
Hittite books. That the Hittites were a literary people,
and possessed a system of writing of their own, we learn
from the Egyptian monuments. What this writing was
<pb n='095'/><anchor id='Pg095'/>
has been revealed by recent discoveries. Inscriptions in
a peculiar kind of hieroglyphics or picture-writing have
been found at Hamath, Aleppo, and Carchemish, in
Kappadokia, Lykaonia, and Lydia. They are always
found associated with sculptures in a curious style of art,
some of which from Carchemish, the modern Jerablûs,
are now in the British Museum. The style of art is the
same as that of the monuments of Asia Minor mentioned
above.
</p>

<p>
It was the discovery of this fact by Professor Sayce,
in 1879, which first revealed the existence of the Hittite
empire and its importance in the history of civilisation.
Certain hieroglyphic inscriptions, originally noticed by
the traveller Burckhardt at Hamah, the ancient Hamath,
had been made accessible to the scientific world by the
Palestine Exploration Fund, and the conjecture had
been put forward that they represented the long-lost
writing of the Hittites. The conjecture was shortly
afterwards confirmed by the discovery of similar inscriptions
at Jerablûs, which Mr. Skene and Mr. George
Smith had already identified with the site of Carchemish.
If, therefore, the early monuments of Asia Minor
were really of Hittite origin, as Professor Sayce supposed,
it was clear that they ought to be accompanied by
Hittite hieroglyphics. And such turned out to be the
case. On visiting the sculptured figure in the Pass of
Karabel, in which Herodotus had seen an image of the
great opponent of the Hittites, he found that the
characters engraved by the side of it were all of them
Hittite forms.
</p>

<p>
Hittite inscriptions have since been discovered attached
to another archaic monument of Lydia, the sitting
figure of the great goddess of Carchemish, carved out of
<pb n='096'/><anchor id='Pg096'/>
the rocks of Mount Sipylos, which the Greeks fancied
was the Niobê of their mythology as far back as the
age of Homer; and similar inscriptions also exist at
Boghaz Keui and Eyuk, in Kappadokia, as well as near
Ivris, in Lykaonia. Others have been discovered in
various parts of Kappadokia and in the Taurus range of
mountains, while a silver boss, which bears a precious
inscription both in Hittite hieroglyphics and in cuneiform
characters, seems to belong to Cilicia. In fact,
there is now abundant evidence that the Hittites once
held dominion throughout the greater portion of Asia
Minor, so that we need no longer feel surprised at their
being able to call Trojans and Lydians to their aid in
their wars against Egypt.
</p>

<p>
The existence of Hittite inscriptions at Hamath goes
to show that Hamath also was once under Hittite rule.
This throws light on several facts recorded in sacred
history. David, after his conquest of the Syrians,
became the ally of the Hamathite king, and the alliance
seems to have lasted down to the time when Hamath
was finally destroyed by the Assyrians, since it is
implied in the words of 2 Kings xiv. 28, as well as in
the alliance between Uzziah and Hamath, of which we
are informed by the Assyrian monuments. Hamath and
Judah, in fact, each had a common enemy in Syria, and
were thus drawn together by a common interest. It
was only when Assyria threatened all the populations
of the west alike, that Hamath and Damascus were
found fighting side by side at the battle of Karkar.
Otherwise they were natural foes.
</p>

<p>
The reason of this lay in the fact that the Hittites
were intruders in the Semitic territory of Syria. Their
origin must be sought in the highlands of Kappadokia,
<pb n='097'/><anchor id='Pg097'/>
and from hence they descended into the regions of the
south, at that time occupied by Semitic Arameans.
Hamath and Kadesh had once been Aramean cities, and
when they were again wrested from the possession of the
Hittites they did but return to their former owners. The
fall of Carchemish meant the final triumph of the Semites
in their long struggle with the Hittite stranger.
</p>

<p>
Even in their southern home the Hittites preserved
the dress of the cold mountainous country from which
they had come. They are characterised by boots with
turned-up toes, such as are still worn by the mountaineers
of Asia Minor and Greece. They were thick-set and
somewhat short of limb, and the Egyptian artists
painted them without beards, of a yellowish-white colour,
with dark black hair. In short, as M. Lenormant has
pointed out, they had all the physical characteristics of
a Caucasian tribe. Their descendants are still to be
met with in the defiles of the Taurus and on the plateau
of Kappadokia, though they have utterly forgotten the
language or languages their forefathers spoke. What
this language was is still uncertain, though the Hittite
proper names which occur on the monuments of Egypt
and Assyria show that it was neither Semitic nor Indo-European.
With the help of the bilingual inscription
in cuneiform and Hittite, already mentioned, Professor
Sayce believes that he has determined the values of a
few characters and partially read three or four names,
but until more inscriptions are brought to light it is
impossible to proceed further. Only it is becoming every
day more probable that the hieroglyphics in which the
inscriptions are written were the origin of a curious
syllabary once used throughout Asia Minor, which
survived in Cyprus into historical times.
</p>

<pb n='098'/><anchor id='Pg098'/>

<p>
Hittite art was originally borrowed from Babylonia,
but modified by the borrowers in a peculiar way. The
borrowing took place before the rise of Assyria. The
astronomical and astrological tablets belonging to the
great work on the heavenly bodies which was compiled
for the library of Sargon I of Accad speak from time to
time of the Khattâ or Hittites, a clear proof that already
at that remote epoch they had moved down from their
northern home into their new quarters in Syria.
Besides the art of Babylonia they also borrowed several
of the Babylonian deities and religious legends. The
supreme goddess of Carchemish was the Babylonian
Istar or Ashtoreth, and the representation of her found on
early Babylonian cylinders was carried by the Hittites
to the western coasts of Asia Minor, and from thence
made its way across the Ægean Sea to Greece. Even
the Amazons of Greek mythology were really nothing
more than the priestesses of this Hittite divinity, who
wore arms in honour of the goddess. The cities which
according to the Greeks were founded by the Amazons
were all of Hittite origin.
</p>

<p>
We may expect to discover hereafter that the
influence exercised by the Hittites upon their Syrian
neighbours was almost as profound as that exercised by
them upon their neighbours in Asia Minor, and through
these upon the fathers of the Greeks. For the present,
however, we must be content with the startling results
that have already been obtained in this new field of
research. A people that once played an important
part in the history of the civilised world has been again
revealed to us after centuries of oblivion, and a forgotten
empire has been again brought to light. The
first chapter has been opened of a new history, which
<pb n='099'/><anchor id='Pg099'/>
can only be completed when more Hittite inscriptions
have been discovered, and the story they contain
has been deciphered. All that is now needed
are explorers and excavators, who shall do for the
buried cities of the Hittites what Botta and Layard have
done for Nineveh or Schliemann for Mykenæ and
Troy.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='100'/><anchor id='Pg100'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VI. The Assyrian Invasions.</head>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>Capture of Jerusalem.&mdash;Shishak.&mdash;Shalmaneser
II.&mdash;Inscription describing
the campaign of his sixth year.&mdash;Correction of the Biblical chronology.&mdash;The
worship of Rimmon.&mdash;War against Hazael.&mdash;The black
obelisk.&mdash;Rimmon-nirari.&mdash;Tiglath-Pileser
II.&mdash;The fall of Arpad.&mdash;Menahem
pays tribute.&mdash;Alliance of Ahaz with Assyria.&mdash;Capture of Samaria and
of Damascus.&mdash;Destruction of Samaria.&mdash;Sargon, Cuthah,
and Sepharvaim.&mdash;Merodach-baladan.&mdash;Invasion
of Judah by Sargon.&mdash;True interpretation
of Isaiah x. and xi.&mdash;Sennacherib's invasion.&mdash;His account of
it.&mdash;The Biblical account.&mdash;The date.&mdash;The Lachish bas-relief.&mdash;Jewish
policy in Hezekiah's reign.&mdash;Hezekiah's public
works.&mdash;The will of Sennacherib.&mdash;Esar-haddon's
reign.&mdash;Explanation of 2 Chron. xxxiii. 2.&mdash;Isaiah
xix.&mdash;Reign of Assur-bani-pal.&mdash;Date of the fall of
Assyria.&mdash;Chronological
table of events described in the chapter.</hi>
</quote>

<p>
When David founded his empire his two powerful
neighbours, Egypt and Assyria, were both in a state of
decline. Assyria had fallen into the hands of unwarlike
kings, who were unable to retain the conquests of their
predecessors, even upon their immediate frontiers; while
Egypt was divided among rival dynasties and rent with
civil wars. Egypt, however, was the first to recover her
strength. The monarchs of the twenty-second dynasty
once more united the country under one rule, and
Shishak or Sheshank I turned his arms against the
cities of Palestine. The brief account given in 1 Kings
xiv. 25, 26, and the fuller history in 2 Chron. xii. of his
invasion of Judah and his capture of Jerusalem, are
supplemented by his own record of it on the walls of
the ruined temple of Karnak. Here the Egyptian king
<pb n='101'/><anchor id='Pg101'/>
is represented as striking down the conquered Hebrews
with a colossal club, while beside him run long rows of
embattled shields, within each of which is the name of
a vanquished city. Among them we find the names not
only of Jewish towns but of Israelitish fortresses also&mdash;such
as Megiddo, Taanach, and Abel&mdash;a proof that the
Egyptian campaign was directed against the northern
kingdom as well as against Judah, and could not, therefore,
have been undertaken at the instigation of Jeroboam,
as has sometimes been supposed. One of the
cities is called Judah-melek, or <q>Judah-king,</q> a title by
which it is possible that Jerusalem may have been
intended. At any rate, there is otherwise no mention
of the royal city of Rehoboam among the shields that
have been preserved.
</p>

<p>
The vigorous rule of Shishak had not ceased long
before Egypt once more sank into a state of anarchy
and weakness, which ended in its conquest by the
Ethiopian Sabako, the So of the Old Testament
(2 Kings xvii. 4). Meanwhile Assyria had recovered
its strength, and had entered upon a new career of
conquest. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 858 Shalmaneser II came to the
throne, and his long reign of thirty-five years was one
continuous history of campaigns against his neighbours,
in the course of which the authority of Assyria was
extended as far as the Mediterranean. The growing
power of Damascus, which Rezon had torn from the
empire of David in the time of Solomon (1 Kings xi.
23-25), formed the chief object of his attack. Already,
in the sixth year of his reign, he had overthrown the
combined forces of Damascus, of Hamath, and of the
Hittites, and had slain 20,500 of his enemies in battle.
Damascus was at this time governed by Hadad-idri or
<pb n='102'/><anchor id='Pg102'/>
Hadadezer, the Ben-hadad II of Scripture, the Scriptural
name being a standing title of the Syrian kings,
and signifying <q>the son of Hadad,</q> the supreme deity
of Damascus. Three years later Shalmaneser again
attacked the Syrian king; but it was not until his
fourteenth year, when he crossed the Euphrates with an
army of 120,000 men, that he achieved any substantial
success.
</p>

<p>
The campaign of the sixth year is narrated in detail
in an inscription engraved by the Assyrian monarch
on the rocks of Armenia. Here we learn that, after
crossing the Euphrates, he received the tribute of the
Hittite states in Pethor, the city of Balaam, which
he describes as being situated at the junction of the
Euphrates and Sajur. He then marched to Aleppo,
where more gifts were brought to him, and after capturing
three of the fortresses of Hamath, reached the
royal city of Karkar or Aroer. This, he says, <q>I threw
down, I dug up, I burned with fire; 1,200 chariots,
1,200 war-magazines, and 20,000 men belonging to
Hadadezer of Damascus; 700 chariots, 700 war-magazines,
and 10,000 men belonging to Irkhulina of Hamath;
2,000 chariots and 10,000 men belonging to Ahab of
Israel (<foreign rend='italic'>Sirlâ</foreign>); 500 men of the Kuans; 1,000 men from
Egypt; 10 chariots and 10,000 men from the land of
Irkanat; 2,000 men belonging to Matinu-baal of Arvad;
2,000 men from the land of Usanat; 30 chariots and
10,000 men belonging to Adoni-baal of Sizan; 1,000
men belonging to Gindibuh of the Arabians; and
several hundred men belonging to Baasha, the son of
Rehob, of the Ammonites&mdash;these twelve kings led their
troops to its help, and came to make war and fighting
against me. By the supreme help which Assur, the
<pb n='103'/><anchor id='Pg103'/>
lord, gave (me), with the mighty weapons which the
great defender who went before me lent (to me), I
fought with them. From the city of Karkar, as far as
the city of Guzau I overthrew them. Fourteen thousand
of their fighting men I slew with weapons; like the
Air-god I bade the storm issue forth upon them; with
their corpses I filled the face of the waters; their vast
armies I brought down with my weapons; there was
not room enough in the country for their dead bodies;
to preserve the life of it I brought back a vast multitude,
and distributed them among its men. The banks
of the River Orontes I reached. In the midst of this
battle I took away from them their chariots, their war-magazines,
and their horses trained to the yoke.</q>
</p>

<p>
The first question that presents itself to us when we
read this inscription is how we are to reconcile the
mention of Ahab in it with the date of the battle of
Karkar (<hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 853). According to the chronology
adopted in the margin of our Bibles, Ahab would have
been dead long before the event. The Assyrian monuments,
however, have proved that this chronology
exceeds the true one by more than forty years; and the
date assigned to Ahab by the inscription harmonises
completely with the dates that other inscriptions assign
to later kings of Israel and Judah. In all probability,
the battle of Karkar took place shortly before Ahab's
death; and it was no doubt in consequence of the defeat
undergone there by the Syrian forces that Ahab was
not only enabled to shake off his subjection to Damascus,
but also to ally himself with Judah, and endeavour
to recover the frontier fortress of Ramoth, of which
Israel had been robbed. The alliance between Ahab and
the king of Damascus is recorded in 1 Kings xx. 34.
<pb n='104'/><anchor id='Pg104'/>
The battle of Karkar must have followed not very
long afterwards, since the attack on Ramoth was made
within three years after the conclusion of the alliance.
Ahab's death may, therefore, be placed in <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 851.
</p>

<p>
Another question that may be asked is how the Assyrian
monarch can say that twelve princes were arrayed in
arms against him, when, according to his own enumeration,
the forces of only eleven nations were present, some
of which do not seem to have been under the command of
any king. The only answer that can be given is that
Shalmaneser is guilty of a similar arithmetical inaccuracy
to that which makes him say that 14,000 of the
enemy fell in battle, whereas, according to other
accounts, the number was really 20,500; though it is
possible that the latter number may include the loss in
other battles that took place during the campaign
besides the decisive one at Karkar. When, however,
we find such arithmetical corruptions as these in contemporaneous
documents, we need not wonder that the
numerical statements of the Old Testament have
become changed and uncertain in their passage through
the hands of generations of copyists.
</p>

<p>
We may infer from the fifth chapter of 2 Kings that
the god Rimmon was the chief object of worship of
Hadadezer or Ben-hadad, the Syrian king. The Assyrian
inscriptions have shown us why this was so.
Rimmon is the Assyrian Ramman, the Air-god, and
Ramman is specially identified with the Syrian deity
Hadad, whose name enters into that of Hadadezer.
Hadad-Rimmon, in fact, was the supreme divinity of
Damascus, where he represented, not the god of the
air, as among the Assyrians, but Baal, the Sun-god,
himself. Hence it is that in Zechariah xii. 11, reference
<pb n='105'/><anchor id='Pg105'/>
is made to the <q>mourning of Hadad-Rimmon in the
valley of Megiddo,</q> that is to say, to the yearly festival,
when the women mourned for the death of the Sun-god,
slain, as it was imagined, by the winter. In
Phœnicia the god was known as Adônis, the <q>lord,</q> or
under his old Babylonian title of Tammuz. It was for
Tammuz, it will be remembered, that Ezekiel saw the
women sitting and weeping within the precincts of <q>the
Lord's house</q> itself in Jerusalem (Ezek. viii. 14).
</p>

<p>
Hadadezer was murdered between the fourteenth
and eighteenth years of Shalmaneser, and the crown
seized by Hazael. In his eighteenth year the Assyrian
king moved against the usurper, and captured his camp
along with 1,121 chariots and 470 war-magazines. The
battle took place on the summit of Sanir or Shenir&mdash;the
name given to Mount Hermon by the Amorites
according to Deut. iii. 9&mdash;<q>which lies over against
Lebanon.</q> Here 16,000 of the Syrians fell in battle, and
Hazael fled to Damascus, whither he was followed by
the Assyrians. Damascus, however, proved too strong
to be captured, and Shalmaneser accordingly contented
himself with cutting down the trees by which it was
surrounded, and retiring into the Haurân, where he
burnt the unwalled towns, and carried away their
inhabitants into captivity. He then followed the high
road from Damascus to the Mediterranean, and on the
promontory of Baal-rosh, at the mouth of the Dog
River, near Beyrût, had an image of himself carved
upon the rocks. At the same place he received the
tribute of Tyre and Sidon, as well as of <q>Yahua, the
son of Khumri,</q> that is to say, of Jehu, the descendant
of Omri. In calling Jehu a descendant of Omri, the
Assyrian king was misinformed; he had heard nothing
<pb n='106'/><anchor id='Pg106'/>
of the revolution which had extirpated the house of
Omri, and had placed Jehu upon the throne. Like
Ahab, therefore, Jehu was supposed to be a son of
Omri, the founder of Samaria, which is frequently
termed Beth-Omri, <q>the house of Omri,</q> in the Assyrian
inscriptions, though in the later days of Tiglath-Pileser
II and Sargon, <q>Beth-Omri</q> is superseded by
<q>Samirina.</q> This was the Aramaic form of the native
name&mdash;Shimrôn, and must consequently have been
derived by the Assyrians from the Aramaic neighbours
of the Israelites.
</p>

<p>
In the Assyrian Hall of the British Museum there
now stands a small obelisk of black marble, which was
brought from Calah by Sir A. H. Layard, on which
Shalmaneser records the annals of his reign. The
upper portion of the monument is occupied by a series
of reliefs representing the tribute brought to the Assyrian
monarch by the distant nations which had sought his
favour. Among the reliefs is one in which the ambassadors
of Jehu are depicted bearing their offerings of gold
and silver bars, of a golden vase and a golden spoon, of
cups and goblets of gold, of pieces of lead, of a royal
sceptre and of clubs of wood. Their features are those
which are still characteristic of the Jewish race, and their
fringed robes descend to their ankles.
</p>

<p>
The death of Shalmaneser brought with it a period
of peace for Damascus and Palestine. His son and
successor turned his arms in other directions, and Hazael
and his successor, Ben-hadad III, were left free to ravage
Israel (2 Kings xiii. 3). It was not until the Israelites,
under Jeroboam II, had taken ample revenge upon the
Syrians, and the coast of Israel was restored <q>from the
entering of Hamath unto the sea of the plain,</q> that an
<pb n='107'/><anchor id='Pg107'/>
Assyrian monarch once more marched towards the
west. This was Rimmon-nirari, grandson of Shalmaneser,
who reigned from <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 810 to 781, and reduced
the kingdom of Damascus to a condition of vassalage.
Damascus was now under the government of a king
called Marih, the successor, probably, of Ben-hadad III,
who, after undergoing a siege at the hands of the
Assyrians, was glad to make terms with them by
acknowledging the supremacy of Rimmon-nirari, and by
giving him 2,300 talents of silver, 20 talents of gold,
3,000 talents of copper, 5,000 talents of iron, embroidered
robes and clothes of fine linen, a couch inlaid with ivory
and an ivory parasol, besides other treasures and furniture
without number which his palace contained. It is
very possible that Jeroboam's successes against the
Syrians were in large measure due to the extent to
which they had been weakened by the Assyrians.
Rimmon-nirari also claims to have received tribute from
Tyre and Sidon, from Beth-Omri, from Edom, and from
Palastu or Palestine&mdash;a name under which we should
probably include not only the district inhabited by the
Philistines, but the kingdom of Judah as well. The
tribute was no doubt sent to him after his triumphal
entry into Damascus.
</p>

<p>
With Rimmon-nirari the power of the older dynasty
of the Assyrian kings came to an end. His successors
were scarcely able to defend themselves against the
attacks of their neighbours on the north and south;
diseases and insurrections broke out in the great cities
of the kingdom, and finally, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 746, there was a
rising in Calah; the king either died or was put to
death, and before the year was over, in the month of
April, <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 745, the crown was seized by a military
<pb n='108'/><anchor id='Pg108'/>
adventurer, named Pul, who assumed the title of Tiglath-Pileser
II. Tiglath-Pileser I had been the most famous
monarch and most extensive conqueror of the older
dynasty, and had reigned over Assyria five centuries
previously; by assuming his name, therefore, the usurper
wished to show that he intended to emulate his deeds.
According to later tradition, the new king had begun
his career as a gardener; whether this were true or not,
he showed great military and executive capacities after
he had established himself on the throne, and it was to
him that the second Assyrian empire owed its origin.
</p>

<p>
Tiglath-Pileser determined to cement the various
states of Western Asia into a single empire, governed by
satraps appointed at Nineveh, and accountable only to
the king. Each satrapy, or province, had to provide a
certain number of men for the imperial army, and to
pay a fixed annual tribute to the imperial treasury.
Thus, Nineveh itself was assessed at 30 talents, ten of
which went to the general expenditure, while the remaining
twenty were devoted to the maintenance of the
fleet. Calah paid 9 talents; Carchemish, once the rich
capital of the Hittites, paid 100; Arpad 30; and
Megiddo but 15. Besides gold and silver, the cities and
provinces were called upon to furnish chariots, clothing,
and other similar contributions.
</p>

<p>
Two years after his accession (<hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 743) Tiglath-Pileser
II turned his attention to the west. Arpad, now
Tel-Erfad, near Aleppo, was the first object of attack.
It held out for three years, and did not fall until <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>
740. But, meanwhile, the kingdom of Hamath had
been shattered by the Assyrian arms. Nineteen of its
districts were placed under Assyrian governors, and the
Assyrian forces made their way as far as the Mediterranean
<pb n='109'/><anchor id='Pg109'/>
Sea. Azri-yahu, or Azariah (Uzziah), the
Jewish king, had been the ally of Hamath, and from
him also punishment was accordingly exacted. He was
compelled to purchase peace by the offer of submission
and the payment of tribute. The alliance between
Judah and Hamath had been of long standing. David
had been the friend of its king Tou or Toi; and at the
beginning of Sargon's reign the king of Hamath bears a
distinctively Jewish name. This is Yahu-bihdi, or, as
it is elsewhere written, Ilu-bihdi, where the word
<foreign rend='italic'>ilu</foreign>,
<q>god,</q> takes the place of the name of the covenant God
of Israel. It is even possible that Yahu-bihdi was a
Jew who had been placed on the throne of Hamath by
Azariah. At any rate, the alliance between Judah and
Hamath explains a passage in 2 Kings xiv. 28, which
has long presented a difficulty. It is now clear that
Jeroboam is here stated to have won over Hamath to
Israel, though previously it had <q>been allied with Judah.</q>
But after Jeroboam's death, Jewish influence must
once more have gained an ascendency among the
Hamathites.
</p>

<p>
Two years after the fall of Arpad, Tiglath-Pileser was
again in the west. On this occasion he held a <foreign rend='italic'>levée</foreign> of
subject princes, among whom Rezon of Damascus and
Manahem of Samaria came to offer their gifts and do
homage to their sovereign lord.<note place='foot'>The Assyrian
inscriptions show that the true form of the name of the
king of Damascus was Rezon, like that of the founder of the kingdom
(1 Kings xi. 23), the Biblical form with <hi rend='italic'>i</hi>
being due to the same vocalic
change as that in <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Toi</foreign>
(2 Sam. viii. 9) by the side of <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Tou</foreign>
(1 Chr. xviii. 9),
or Hiram (1 Kings v. 1) by the side of Huram (2 Chr. ii. 11). Hezion
in 1 Kings xv. 18 is probably a copyist's error for Rezon.</note> The tribute which
Tiglath-Pileser states that he then received from the
Israelitish king was given, according to the Book of
<pb n='110'/><anchor id='Pg110'/>
Kings, to Pul. We may infer from this, therefore, that
the Assyrian monarch was still known to the neighbouring
nations by his original name, and that it was not
until later that they became accustomed to the new title
he had assumed. The inference is further borne out by
the statement of an ancient Greek astronomer, Ptolemy.
When speaking of the eclipses which were observed at
Babylon, Ptolemy gives a list of Babylonian kings, with
the length of their reigns, from the so-called era of
Nabonassar, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 747, down to the time of Alexander
the Great. In this list, Tiglath-Pileser, after his conquest
of Babylon, is named Poros or Por, Por being the
Persian form of Pul.
</p>

<p>
During the lifetime of Menahem Israel remained
tributary to Assyria, and the Assyrian king did not
again turn his arms against the west. After the death
of Menahem and the murder of his son Pekahiah, however,
important changes took place. The usurper,
Pekah, in alliance with Rezon of Damascus, attacked
Judah with the intention of overthrowing the dynasty
of David and placing on the throne of Jerusalem a vassal
king whose father's name, Tabeel, shows that he must
have been a Syrian. Jotham, the Jewish king, died
shortly after the war began, and the youth and weakness
of his son and successor Ahaz laid Judah open to
its antagonists, who were further aided by a disaffected
party within the capital itself (Isa. viii. 6). In his
extremity, therefore, Ahaz appealed to the Assyrian
monarch, who was already seeking an excuse for crushing
Damascus, and reducing the Jewish kingdom, with
its important fortress of Jerusalem, to a condition of
vassalage. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 734, accordingly, Tiglath-Pileser
marched into Syria. Rezon was defeated in a pitched
<pb n='111'/><anchor id='Pg111'/>
battle, his chariots broken in pieces, his captains captured
and impaled, while he himself escaped to Damascus,
where he was closely besieged by the enemy. The
territory of Damascus was now devastated with fire and
sword, its sixteen districts were <q>overwhelmed as with a
flood,</q> and the beautiful gardens by which the capital
was surrounded were destroyed, every tree being cut
down for use in the siege. The city itself, however,
proved too strong to be taken by assault; so, leaving a
sufficient force before it to reduce it by famine, Tiglath-Pileser
proceeded against the late allies of the Syrian
king. Israel was the first to be attacked. The north of
the country was overrun, and the tribes beyond the
Jordan carried into captivity. Gilead and Abel-beth-maachah
are mentioned by name as among the towns
that were taken and sacked.<note place='foot'>Compare 2 Kings xv.
29.</note> The Assyrians then fell
upon Ammon and Moab, which had aided Israel and
Syria in the attack on Judah, and next made their way
along the sea-coast into the country of the Philistines,
who had seized the opportunity of the late war to shake
off the yoke of the Jewish king. Their leader, Khanun
or Hanno of Gaza, fled into Egypt; but Gaza itself was
captured and laid under tribute, its gods carried away,
and an image of the Assyrian king set up in the temple
of Dagon. Ekron and Ashdod were also punished, and
Metinti of Ashkelon committed suicide in order to escape
the vengeance of the conqueror.
</p>

<p>
Now that all fear of danger in the south had been
removed, Tiglath-Pileser marched back into the northern
kingdom, took Samaria, and (according to his own
account) put Pekah to death, appointing Hosea king in
his place. A yearly tribute of ten talents of gold and
<pb n='112'/><anchor id='Pg112'/>
a thousand of silver was at the same time exacted.
Shortly afterwards some of the Assyrian troops were
sent against the Edomites and the Queen of the Arabs,
who had also revolted against Assyria and joined the
Syro-Israelite league. Indeed, this league seems to have
been formed for the purpose of checking the Assyrian
advance, and the war against Judah to have been due to
a refusal of Jotham to take part in it. It was an anticipation
of the league that was afterwards formed in the
time of Hezekiah against the growing power of Sargon.
</p>

<p>
Meanwhile, after a siege of two years, Damascus fell
in <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 732. Rezon was slain, his subjects transported
into captivity, and a great court, like a durbar in modern
India, was held in his palace by Tiglath-Pileser. Among
the subject-princes who attended it was Ahaz of Judah.
He is called Jehoahaz in the Assyrian inscriptions, and it
is therefore clear that the sacred historians have dropped
the first part of the name, in consequence of the character
of the king. The divine name would have been profaned
by its association with an idolatrous and unworthy
prince. As Khanun appeared at the court along with
Kavus-melech of Edom, Metinti of Ashkelon, Solomon
of Moab, and Sanib of Ammon, he must have succeeded
in obtaining a pardon. It was while Ahaz was at
Damascus in attendance on the Assyrian monarch that
he saw the altar, the pattern of which he sent to Urijah,
ordering it to be set up in the court of the Lord's
house.
</p>

<p>
Tiglath-Pileser died in <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 727, and was succeeded by
Shalmaneser IV. The refusal of Hosea to continue the
annual tribute brought the new Assyrian monarch into
the west. Tyre was besieged unsuccessfully, Hosea
carried away captive, and Samaria blockaded for three
<pb n='113'/><anchor id='Pg113'/>
years. During the blockade Shalmaneser died, and the
crown was seized by one of the Assyrian generals. The
latter assumed the name of Sargon, in memory of the
famous Babylonian monarch who had reigned so many
centuries before. The capture of Samaria took place in
his first year (<hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 722); 27,280 of its inhabitants were
sent into exile, but only fifty chariots were found in the
city. An Assyrian governor was appointed over it, who
was commissioned to send each year to Nineveh the
same tribute as that paid by Hosea. The comparatively
small number of Israelites who were carried into captivity
shows that Sargon contented himself with removing
only those persons and their families who had
taken part in the revolt against him; in fact, Samaria
was treated pretty much as Jerusalem was by Nebuchadrezzar
in the time of Jehoiachin. The greater part
of the old population was allowed to remain in its
native land. This fact disposes of the modern theories
which assume that the whole of the Ten Tribes were
carried away. The districts to which the captives were
taken were Halah, the banks of the Habor, or river of
Gozan, and the cities of the Medes. Halah was not far
from Haran in Mesopotamia, on the western side of
the Habor, the modern Khabur, which flows into the
Euphrates, and rises in the country called Guzana, or
Gozan, in the Assyrian inscriptions. The Medes were
the tribes who lived eastward of Kurdistan, which, like
Mesopotamia, had been overrun by Tiglath-Pileser.
</p>

<p>
The places of the captive Israelites were not supplied
immediately. We learn from the Old Testament that it
was from Hamath and the cities of Babylonia that the
new inhabitants were brought. Now Hamath was not
conquered by Sargon until <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 720, and Babylonia not
<pb n='114'/><anchor id='Pg114'/>
until <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 710. Hamath had broken into revolt under
Yahu-bihdi or Ilu-bihdi, who induced Arpad, Damascus,
and Samaria to follow its example. But its chastisement
was speedy and sharp. Sargon captured Ilu-bihdi
in the city of Aroer, and flayed him alive; while Hamath
received a colony of 4,300 Assyrians and an Assyrian
governor. Samaria was next punished, and Sargon
then marched southward against the combined forces of
Khanun of Gaza and Sabako or So of Egypt. A
battle at Raphia decided the fate of the struggle, and
Khanun fell into the hands of his enemies.
</p>

<p>
The Babylonian cities from which some of the new
settlers in Samaria were taken were Cuthah and Sepharvaim.
Cuthah is now represented by the mounds of
Tel Ibrahim, to the north-west of Babylon. It was
under the special protection of Nergal, whose name
means <q>the lord of the great city,</q> the god of the under-world.
Sepharvaim, or <q>the two Sipparas,</q> stood on
opposite banks of the Euphrates. The quarter on the
eastern bank, now called Abu-Habba, was Sippara
proper, where, according to Babylonian tradition, Sisuthros
had buried his books before the Deluge; the
quarter on the other bank being Agadé or Accad, the
old capital of Sargon I, which gave its name to the
whole of the northern portion of Chaldea. In later
times the two quarters were distinguished from one
another as <q>Sippara of Samas,</q> the Sun-god, and
<q>Sippara of Anunit.</q> Anunit was the wife of the god
Anu, <q>the sky</q>; and when the Bible says that <q>the
Sepharvites burnt their children in fire to Anammelech</q>
reference is made to <q>Anu the king.</q> Adrammelech, or
<q>Adar the king,</q> was another Babylonian deity, who was
originally a form of the Sun-god.
</p>

<pb n='115'/><anchor id='Pg115'/>

<p>
We may gather from Ezra iv. 2, 10, that Samaria was
colonised a second time by the Assyrians, perhaps in
consequence of an unsuccessful revolt. This took place
in the reign of Esar-haddon. His son Asnapper, or
Assur-bani-pal, settled a number of Elamite tribes in
the country, among them being natives of Susa and of
Apharsa or Mal Amir. Men from Babylon and Erech
were also settled there at the same time. The names of
the new colonists would suit the reign of Assur-bani-pal
better than that of Esar-haddon, since it was Assur-bani-pal,
and not Esar-haddon, who conquered Elam
and Susa, and took by storm both Babylon and Erech.
It is, therefore, probable that Esar-haddon in verse 2 is
a scribe's error for Asnapper.
</p>

<p>
The reduction of the northern kingdom of Israel into
an Assyrian province brought the Assyrian empire to
the very borders of Judah, and the Assyrian kings began
to cast longing eyes upon the territory of the latter. Its
capital, Jerusalem, was an almost impregnable fortress,
the possession of which would open the road into Egypt,
as well as block the passage of an Egyptian army into
Asia. But as yet there was no excuse for attacking it.
Hezekiah, the successor of Ahaz, continued to pay the
tribute his father had consented to give to the Assyrians,
and Sargon accordingly occupied himself in wars elsewhere.
Suddenly, however, an event occurred which
brought him once more into Palestine. In order to
understand this, we must turn our eyes for a moment or
two to Babylonia.
</p>

<p>
The Babylonians had seized the opportunity offered
by the death of Tiglath-Pileser to shake off the
Assyrian yoke. For five years they remained free.
Then in <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 722 the country was occupied by a man of
<pb n='116'/><anchor id='Pg116'/>
great energy and ability, Merodach-baladan, the son of
Yagina.<note place='foot'>The name of Baladan in 2 Kings xx. 12 (and Isa. xxxix. 1) is
due to the error of a copyist, like Berodach for Merodach. His eye must have
run back to the name of Merodach-baladan in the preceding line. Merodach-baladan
means <q>Merodach has given a son,</q> and without <q>Merodach</q>
would be incomplete.</note> Merodach-baladan was the hereditary chief
of the Kaldâ or Chaldeans, a small tribe at that time
settled in the marshes at the mouth of the Euphrates,
but which, in consequence of his conquest of Babylon
afterwards, became the dominant caste in Babylonia
itself. For twelve years he continued undisputed master
of the country we may henceforth call Chaldea. Sargon,
however, was becoming every year more powerful, and it
was evident that another Assyrian invasion of Babylonia
would not be long postponed. Merodach-baladan
determined to anticipate the attack. He therefore
endeavoured to form a vast league between the states on
both the eastern and the western sides of the Assyrian
empire, whose independence was menaced by their
powerful neighbour. Babylonia and Elam were the
eastern members of the league, and ambassadors were
sent to the west, to concert measures with the various
states of Palestine, as well as with Egypt, for common
action against Sargon.
</p>

<p>
Hezekiah, now in the fourteenth year of his reign
(2 Kings xx. 6), had just recovered from a dangerous
illness, which had been aggravated by the fear of
Assyria, and the fact that as yet he had no son
to succeed him. The illness formed the pretext by
which the conspirators hoped to blind the eyes of
Sargon to the real objects of the embassy; it was
published to the world that the ambassadors had come
<pb n='117'/><anchor id='Pg117'/>
merely to congratulate the Jewish king on his recovery.
But Sargon knew well that Merodach-baladan would not
have troubled himself to enquire after the health of a
brother-king without a further motive, and he doubtless
learned that Hezekiah had shown the ambassadors all
the treasures and arms with which he hoped to support
the league. The consequence was, that before the confederates
were prepared to resist him, the Assyrian
monarch had swooped down upon them and attacked
them singly.
</p>

<p>
Palestine was the first to suffer. Akhimit, whom
Sargon had appointed king of Ashdod, had been dethroned,
and the crown given to an usurper named
Yavan or <q>the Greek.</q> Yavan seems to have been the
nominee of Hezekiah, who at this time exercised a sort
of suzerainty over the Philistine cities, and he was set
up as king for the purpose of heading the Philistine
revolt against Assyria. Edom and Moab also sent
contingents to the war, and the Ethiopian king of Egypt
promised help. Of the details of the struggle between
Sargon and the western states we unfortunately know
nothing. But it did not last long; neither Babylonia
nor Egypt had time to send any assistance to their
allies. The <foreign rend='italic'>Tartan</foreign> or Commander-in-chief was ordered
to invest Ashdod (see Isa. xx. 1), while Sargon himself
overran <q>the wide-spreading land of Judah,</q> and captured
its capital Jerusalem. This conquest of Judah by
Sargon explains prophecies of Isaiah which have
hitherto been unsolved mysteries. Thus an explanation
is at length offered of the circumstances described by the
prophet in chapters x. and xi. Here the Assyrian army
is described as marching along the usual high-road from
the north-east, and as halting at Nob, only an hour's
<pb n='118'/><anchor id='Pg118'/>
journey distant from Jerusalem, on the very day when
the oracle was uttered,<note place='foot'><q>That day</q> in
the A. V. should be corrected into <q>to-day</q> (Isa. x.
32).</note> while Isaiah declares that the
capital itself shall fall into the hands of the enemy
(x. 6, 12, 22, 24, 34).
</p>

<p>
All this is inapplicable to the invasion of Sennacherib,
when a detachment only of the Assyrian army
was sent against Jerusalem from the south-west, and
when Isaiah was commissioned by God to promise
that the king of Assyria should <q>not come into this
city, nor shoot an arrow there, nor come before it
with shield, nor cast a bank against it.</q> The older
commentators were accordingly driven to the desperate
expedient of supposing that the invasion described by
Isaiah in the tenth chapter of his prophecies was an
ideal one. Thanks, however, to the decipherment of the
cuneiform inscriptions, all is now clear, and we can now
understand why it is that the Assyrian monarch, whose
march is described by Isaiah, claims to be the conqueror
of Calno and Carchemish, of Hamath and Arpad, of
Damascus and Samaria (w. 8-10). All these were
conquests of Sargon, not of Sennacherib.
</p>

<p>
Ashdod was taken and razed to the ground, and its
inhabitants sold into captivity. Yavan managed to
escape to the Egyptian king, who was cowardly enough
to give him up to his enemies. Edom and Moab were
punished for the part they had taken in the rebellion,
and the authority of Sargon was paramount as far as
the frontier of Egypt.
</p>

<p>
All this happened in <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 711. The following year
the whole power of Assyria was hurled against Merodach-baladan.
The Elamites were defeated and their
<pb n='119'/><anchor id='Pg119'/>
border-towns sacked, and the Babylonian king was
compelled to retreat southwards, leaving Babylon in the
hands of the Assyrians. A year later he was pursued
by Sargon into his last refuge; Bit-Yagina, his ancestral
capital, was taken by storm, and he himself forced to
surrender. His good fortune never returned. On
Sargon's death he once more entered Babylon, but his
second reign only lasted six months. After a battle
which ended in the complete victory of Sennacherib, he
fled again to the marshes, but was driven out of them
four years later, and sailed across the Persian Gulf to
find a new home on the western coast of Elam. But
even here his implacable enemies followed him. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>
697, Sennacherib manned a fleet with Phœnician sailors
and destroyed the town the old Chaldean prince had
built. After this we hear of him no more.
</p>

<p>
The tenth chapter of Isaiah teaches us to look for
references to the capture of Jerusalem by Sargon in
other parts of the book. It is impossible not to
recognise one of these in the twenty-second chapter.
Here the prophet presents us with the picture of a siege
which has already lasted some time, and when the
inhabitants of Jerusalem are no longer slain by the
sword, but by famine, while the city is on the point of
being starved out. Here also the message which Isaiah
is bidden to deliver is not a promise of deliverance from
the enemy, but the reverse: <q>It was revealed in my
ears by the Lord of Hosts, surely this iniquity shall not
be purged from you till ye die, saith the Lord God of
Hosts.</q> It is only the campaign of Sargon that can
explain these words.
</p>

<p>
Ten years later Judah was again invaded by an
Assyrian king, and Jerusalem again threatened by an
<pb n='120'/><anchor id='Pg120'/>
Assyrian army. Sargon had been murdered by his
soldiers, and succeeded by his son, Sennacherib, who
mounted the throne on the 12th of the month of Ab,
or July, <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 705. He was a very different man from his
father, weak and vain-glorious, fonder of boasting than
of deeds. Trusting to the support of Tirhakah, the
Ethiopian king of Egypt, Hezekiah threw off his allegiance
to Assyria, and refused to send the yearly
tribute to Nineveh. The Phœnicians did the same,
while the Jewish king reasserted his former supremacy
over the cities of the Philistines. Padi, the king of
Ekron, who remained faithful to Assyria, was carried
in chains to Jerusalem, and Zedekiah, who is named in
the Assyrian records as the king of Ashkelon, was
probably of Jewish origin. It was not until three years
after his accession that Sennacherib found himself able
to march against the rebels. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 701 he crossed
the Euphrates, and made his way to the shores of the
Mediterranean. Great and Little Sidon, Sarepta, Acre,
and other Phœnician towns, surrendered to the invader,
the Sidonian monarch fled to Cyprus, and the kings of
Arvad and Gebal hastened to pay their court to the
conquerer. Metinti of Ashdod, Pedael of Ammon,
Chemosh-nadad of Moab, and Melech-ram of Edom,
who were also suspected of having taken part in the
rebellion, came at the same time. Judah and the
dependent Philistine states alone still held out.
</p>

<p>
The rest of the history had best be told in Sennacherib's
own words. <q>Zedekiah, king of Ashkelon,</q> he
says, <q>who had not submitted to my yoke, himself, the
gods of the house of his fathers, his wife, his sons, his
daughters and his brothers, the seed of the house of his
fathers, I removed, and I sent him to Assyria. I set
<pb n='121'/><anchor id='Pg121'/>
over the men of Ashkelon, Sarludari, the son of Rukipti,
their former king, and I imposed upon him the payment
of tribute, and the homage due to my majesty, and he
became a vassal. In the course of my campaign I
approached and captured Beth-Dagon, Joppa, Bene-berak
and Azur, the cities of Zedekiah, which did
not submit at once to my yoke, and I carried away
their spoil. The priests, the chief men, and the common
people of Ekron, who had thrown into chains their king
Padi because he was faithful to his oaths to Assyria, and
had given him up to Hezekiah, the Jew, who imprisoned
him like an enemy in a dark dungeon, feared in their
hearts. The king of Egypt, the bowmen, the chariots
and the horses of the king of Ethiopia, had gathered
together innumerable forces and gone to their assistance.
In sight of the town of Eltekeh was their order
of battle drawn up; they called their troops (to the
battle). Trusting in Assur, my lord, I fought with them
and overthrew them. My hands took the captains of
the chariots and the sons of the king of Egypt, as well
as the captains of the chariots of the king of Ethiopia,
alive in the midst of the battle. I approached and
captured the towns of Eltekeh and Timnath, and I
carried away their spoil. I marched against the city of
Ekron, and put to death the priests and the chief men
who had committed the sin (of rebellion), and I hung
up their bodies on stakes all round the city. The
citizens who had done wrong and wickedness I counted
as a spoil; as for the rest of them who had done no sin
or crime, in whom no fault was found, I proclaimed
their freedom (from punishment). I had Padi, their
king, brought out from the midst of Jerusalem, and I
seated him on the throne of royalty over them, and I
<pb n='122'/><anchor id='Pg122'/>
laid upon him the tribute due to my majesty. But as
for Hezekiah of Judah, who had not submitted to my
yoke, forty-six of his strong cities, together with innumerable
fortresses and small towns which depended on
them, by overthrowing the walls and open attack, by
battle, engines and battering-rams I besieged, I captured.
I brought out from the midst of them and counted
as a spoil 200,150 persons, great and small, male and
female, horses, mules, asses, camels, oxen and sheep
without number. Hezekiah himself I shut up like a
bird in a cage in Jerusalem, his royal city. I built a
line of forts against him, and I kept back his heel from
going forth out of the great gate of his city. I cut off
his cities which I had spoiled from the midst of his land,
and gave them to Metinti, king of Ashdod, Padi, king of
Ekron, and Zil-baal, king of Gaza, and I made his
country small. In addition to their former tribute and
yearly gifts I added other tribute, and the homage due
to my majesty, and I laid it upon them. The fear of
the greatness of my majesty overwhelmed him, even
Hezekiah, and he sent after me to Nineveh, my royal
city, by way of gift and tribute, the Arabs and his
body-guard whom he had brought for the defence of
Jerusalem, his royal city, and had furnished with pay,
along with thirty talents of gold, 800 talents of pure
silver, carbuncles and other precious stones, a couch of
ivory, thrones of ivory, an elephant's hide, an elephant's
tusk, rare woods, whatever their names, a vast treasure,
as well as the eunuchs of his palace, dancing men and
dancing women; and he sent his ambassador to offer
homage.</q>
</p>

<p>
The Assyrian and the Biblical accounts complete and
supplement one another. Sennacherib naturally glosses
<pb n='123'/><anchor id='Pg123'/>
over the disaster that befel him in Palestine, and
transfers the payment of the tribute from the time when
Hezekiah vainly hoped to buy off the siege of Jerusalem
to the end of the campaign. But he cannot conceal
the fact that he never succeeded in taking the revolted
city or in punishing Hezekiah, as he had punished other
rebel kings, nor did he again undertake a campaign in
the west. We find him the next year in Babylonia; then
he attacked the tribes of Cilicia; but he never again
ventured into Palestine. During the rest of his lifetime
Judah had nothing more to fear from the Assyrian
king.
</p>

<p>
At first sight there seems to be a discrepancy between
the number of silver talents stated in the Bible to have
been paid by Hezekiah, and the number which Sennacherib
claims to have received. But the discrepancy is
only an apparent one. It has been shown that there
were two standards of value, according to one of which
500 talents of silver would be equivalent to 800 talents,
if reckoned by the other. A more real discrepancy is to
be found in the statement of Sennacherib that he had
built a line of forts round about Jerusalem, and prevented
Hezekiah from getting out of it. This is in
flagrant contradiction to the words of Isaiah, that the
Assyrian king should not shoot an arrow into Jerusalem,
nor assault it under the cover of shields, nor cast a bank
against it. Sennacherib claims to have performed more
than he actually did.
</p>

<p>
Another discrepancy has been found in the date
assigned by the Biblical narrative to the Assyrian
invasion. The year <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 701 was the twenty-fourth
year of Hezekiah, not the fourteenth, which fell in
<hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 711, the year of Sargon's campaign. But this very
<pb n='124'/><anchor id='Pg124'/>
fact supplies an explanation of the difficulty. In the
retrospective record of the prophetical annalist, the two
campaigns of Sargon and Sennacherib have been
brought into association, though the history dwells only
upon that one which illustrated God's way of dealing
with His faithful servants. Hence it is that reminiscences
of the earlier invasion are allowed to enter here
and there into the narrative. It was Sargon, and not
Sennacherib, who was the conqueror of Hamath and
Arpad, of Sepharvaim and Samaria (2 Kings xviii. 34-36).
It was Sargon, and not Sennacherib, who invaded
Judah in the fourteenth year of Hezekiah's reign.
</p>

<p>
There is a bas-relief in the British Museum which
represents Sennacherib seated on his throne in front of
Lachish, and receiving the spoil of the city as it passed
before him. It was while he was encamped before this
city that Hezekiah despatched the embassy with gifts
and tribute and prayers for pardon. Sennacherib
accepted the gifts, but refused the pardon; nothing
would content him but the absolute surrender of
Jerusalem and its king. Hezekiah then prepared for
his defence. We gather from Isaiah's writings that there
were at that period three parties in the State, each of
which at different times gained an influence over the
king and his councillors. There was first the party
headed by Shebna&mdash;whose name proves him to have
been of Syrian parentage&mdash;which advocated alliance
with Egypt and hostility to Assyria. This was the
party with which Isaiah had mainly to contend, but its
power was not finally extinguished until after the
retreat of Tirhakah from the battle of Eltekeh, and this
visible proof that Egypt was but a bruised reed to lean
upon. The second party inherited the policy of Ahaz,
<pb n='125'/><anchor id='Pg125'/>
and urged that Judah's only chance of safety lay in
submission to the mighty Empire of Assyria. Isaiah
was the representative of the third party. He announced
God's own declaration, that He would defend
His city and temple if only its inhabitants would trust
and fear Him, and reject all alliances with the heathen
nations that surrounded them. <q>In quietness and in
confidence</q> should be their strength. It was not until
events had demonstrated the truth of Isaiah's message
that the rulers of Jerusalem reluctantly accepted it, and
recognised at last that the true policy of Judah was to
abstain from mixing in the wars and intrigues of the
foreign idolater.
</p>

<p>
When the Jewish embassy arrived at Lachish, the
Egyptian party seems still to have been in the ascendant.
In spite of the prophet's warning, envoys had been
sent to Egypt (Isa. xxx. xxxi.), and had returned full of
confidence in an alliance, which yet was to be to them
not <q>an help nor profit, but a shame and also a
reproach.</q> The battle of Eltekeh dissipated their hopes.
This was fought after the capture of Lachish, when
Sennacherib was endeavouring to take the neighbouring
fortress of Libnah (2 Kings xix. 8, 9). The Rab-shakeh or
Prime Minister had been sent against Jerusalem along
with the Tartan or Commander-in-chief and the Rab-saris
or Chamberlain, and after delivering his message to
its defenders had returned to Sennacherib, leaving a
considerable force under the Tartan encamped outside
its walls. The message had been delivered in Hebrew,
not in Assyrian or in Aramaic (Syrian), which at that
time was the general language of trade and diplomacy
in Western Asia, like French in modern Europe. Every
politician was expected to speak it, and Hezekiah's
<pb n='126'/><anchor id='Pg126'/>
ministers take it for granted that the Rab-shakeh would
be able to do so. The fact that he preferred to speak in
Hebrew gives us a high idea of the education of the
age. Every cultivated Assyrian was acquainted with
Accadian, the old dead language of Babylonia, which
was to an Assyrian what Latin is to us; and in addition
to this diplomatists and men of business were required
to know Aramaic, while we here find the highest of
Assyrian officials further able to converse in Hebrew.
</p>

<p>
A reminiscence of the disaster which befel the
Assyrian army was preserved in an Egyptian legend,
which ascribed it to the piety of an Egyptian king.
Influenced by this legend, some scholars have supposed
that it took place at Pelusium, on the Egyptian
frontier; but the language of Scripture seems hardly to
leave a doubt that it really happened before Jerusalem.
The result was the abrupt breaking up of the Assyrian
camp and the termination of the siege of Jerusalem.
Sennacherib hastened back to Nineveh, and the court
annalists were bidden to draw a veil of silence over the
conclusion of the campaign.
</p>

<p>
Hezekiah did not long survive his wonderful deliverance.
Next to Solomon he seems to have been the
most cultivated of the Jewish kings. His public works
rendered Jerusalem one of the most formidable fortresses
of the ancient world; and if the tunnel of Siloam
belongs to his reign, it is clear that he had at his
disposal engineering skill of a high order. He was not
only himself a poet, but a restorer of the old psalmody
and a patron of literature. In imitation, probably, of
the libraries of Assyria and Babylonia, he established a
library in Jerusalem, where scribes were employed, as
they were at Nineveh, in making new editions of ancient
<pb n='127'/><anchor id='Pg127'/>
works (see Prov. xxv. 1.). Ahaz had introduced into
Judah the study of astronomy, for which the Babylonians
were renowned, and had set up a gnomon or
sun-dial in the palace-court (2 Kings xx. 11). It is
possible that some of the astronomical literature of
Babylonia, which has been recovered from the cuneiform
tablets now in the British Museum, was introduced at
the same time, with its multitudinous observations and
prediction of eclipses, its notices of the appearance of
comets, of the movements of the planets and fixed stars,
of the phases of Venus, and even of spots on the sun.
It is also possible that the Assyrian calendar and the
Assyrian names of the months now first became
familiar to the Jews. At any rate, it would seem, from
Jer. xxiii. 10, 11, that clay came to be used in Judah
as a writing material, just as it was at Babylon or
Nineveh, the inner clay record of a contract being
covered with an outer coating, on which was inscribed
an abstract of its contents, together with the names of
the witnesses. Jeremiah's deed of purchase, moreover,
was preserved in a jar, like the numerous clay deeds of
the Egibi banking-firm, which existed at Babylon from
the age of Nebuchadrezzar to that of Xerxes. These
jars served the purpose of our modern safes.
</p>

<p>
Sennacherib lived for twenty years after his withdrawal
from Palestine. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 681 he was murdered
by his two elder sons, Adar-melech and Nergal-sharezer,
who were jealous of the favour shown by him towards
their younger brother Esar-haddon. A curious evidence
of this favour exists among the tablets in the British
Museum. This is nothing less than the will of Sennacherib,
made apparently some years before his death, in
which he bequeaths to Esar-haddon certain private property.
<pb n='128'/><anchor id='Pg128'/>
The document reads as follows:&mdash;<q>I, Sennacherib,
king of multitudes, king of Assyria, bequeath
armlets of gold, quantities of ivory, a platter of gold,
ornaments, and chains for the neck, all these beautiful
things of which there are heaps, and three sorts of precious
stones, one and a half manehs and two and a half
shekels in weight, to Esar-haddon my son, whose name
was afterwards changed to Assur-sar-illik-pal by my wish.
The treasure is deposited in the house of Amuk.</q> The
king was excused the necessity of having his will
attested by witnesses, as was obligatory in the case of
other persons; and it is plain that at the time when it
was made Esar-haddon was not the recognised heir to
the throne.
</p>

<p>
The murder of the old king took place, according to
the Bible, <q>as he was worshipping in the house of Nisroch
his god.</q> The reading of the god's name, however, is
corrupt, since no such deity was known to the Assyrians,
and it is possible that Nusku, the companion of Nebo,
the patron of literature, is intended. A war was going
on at the time between Assyria and Armenia, and the
murderers finding, apparently, no adherents in Nineveh,
fled to Erimenas, the Armenian king. Esar-haddon, at
the head of the Assyrian veterans, met them and the
Armenian forces, a few weeks afterwards, at a place not
far from Melitene, the modern Malatiyeh, in Kappadokia.
The battle ended in the complete victory of the Assyrians,
and Esar-haddon was saluted <q>king</q> on the spot by
his soldiers. He then returned to Nineveh, and there
formally ascended the throne.
</p>

<p>
Esar-haddon resembled his father but little. He was
one of the ablest generals Assyria ever produced, and
was distinguished from his predecessors by his mild and
<pb n='129'/><anchor id='Pg129'/>
conciliatory policy. Under him the Assyrian empire
reached its furthest limits, Egypt being conquered, and
placed under twenty Assyrian satraps, while an Assyrian
army penetrated into the very heart of the Arabian
desert. But the conquests which had been won in war
were cemented by a policy of justice and moderation.
Thus Babylon, which had been razed to the ground
by Sennacherib in <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 691, and the adjoining river
choked with its ruins, was rebuilt, and Esar-haddon
endeavoured to win over the Babylonians by residing
in it during half the year. This affords an explanation
of a fact mentioned in the Second Book of Chronicles
(xxxiii. 11), which has long been a stumbling-block in
the way of critics. It is there said that the king of
Assyria, after crushing the revolt of Manasseh, carried
him away captive to Babylon. The cause of this is now
clear. As Esar-haddon spent part of his time at Babylon
it merely depended on the season of the year to which
of his two capitals, Nineveh or Babylon, a political
prisoner should be brought. The treatment of Manasseh
was in full accordance with the treatment of other rebel
princes in the time of Esar-haddon's son, Assur-bani-pal.
Like them, he was at first loaded with chains, but
was afterwards allowed to return to his kingdom and
reinstated in the government of it.
</p>

<p>
The name of <q>Manasseth, king of Judah,</q> twice occurs
on the Assyrian monuments. Once he is mentioned
among the tributaries of Esar-haddon, once among those
of Assur-bani-pal. It is clear, therefore, that at some
period shortly after Hezekiah's death, Judah was again
forced to pay tribute and do homage to the Assyrian
king. When Esar-haddon passed through Palestine on
his way to Egypt, he found there only submission and
<pb n='130'/><anchor id='Pg130'/>
respect. Sidon alone withstood him, and Sidon was
accordingly destroyed.
</p>

<p>
The <q>burden</q> pronounced upon Egypt by Isaiah
(ch. xix.) must belong to the age of Esar-haddon. The
condition of Egypt at the time was exactly that
described by the prophet. The country was divided
into hostile kingdoms, which fought <q>every one against
his brother, and every one against his neighbour; city
against city, and kingdom against kingdom.</q> Tirhakah
the Ethiopian, whom the Assyrians had driven out,
invaded it from the south, and Esar-haddon came down
upon it from the north. He it is who is <q>the fierce
king</q> who, the Lord declared, should rule over the
Egyptians. For about twenty years the unhappy country
was wasted with fire and sword. The twenty governors
appointed by the Assyrians were constantly intriguing
against one another and their suzerain; and again and
again the Assyrian armies were called upon to return to
Egypt to suppress a revolt. It was during one of these
campaigns&mdash;that which happened about <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 665, in the
reign of Assur-bani-pal&mdash;that Thebes, the ancient capital
of Upper Egypt, was destroyed. It is termed Ni in the
Assyrian texts, a name which corresponds to the Hebrew
No-Amon, or No of Amun, the supreme god of the city.
Its temples and palaces were overthrown, their treasures
were carried away, and two obelisks, which together
weighed over seventy tons, were sent as trophies to
Nineveh. Nahum (iii. 8) alludes to this destruction of
Thebes as a recent event, and thus fixes the approximate
age of his life and ministry.
</p>

<p>
The reign of Esar-haddon was a short one. In
<hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 670, on the 12th day of Iyyar, or April, he convened
by edict a great assembly in Nineveh, and there associated
<pb n='131'/><anchor id='Pg131'/>
his son Assur-bani-pal, whom the Greeks called
Sardanapalus, in the government. Two years later he
died, and Assur-bani-pal was proclaimed sole king on
the 27th of Ab, or July. Assur-bani-pal, the <foreign rend='italic'>grand
monarque</foreign> of Assyria, whose long reign was a continuous
series of wars, and building, and magnificent patronage of
art and literature, has little direct contact with Biblical
history. The conquest of Elam by his generals removed
the last civilized power which could struggle with
Assyria; but it was not fully accomplished when the
mighty empire began to totter to its fall. A general
rebellion broke out, at the heart of which was Assur-bani-pal's
own brother, the viceroy of Babylonia. All
the strength of Assyria was spent in crushing it; and
Egypt, which had revolted through the help of Gyges of
Lydia, was never reconquered. Palestine, strangely
enough, seems to have been but little affected by the
almost universal outbreak; indeed, Chemosh-khalta of
Moab materially assisted Assur-bani-pal, by defeating
the Kedarites and sending their sheikh in chains to
Nineveh. One or two Phœnician cities alone took
occasion to refuse their tribute. We do not know the
year of Assur-bani-pal's death, but it was probably about
<hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 630. He left a troubled heritage to his successors.
The viceroy of Babylonia was becoming more and more
independent; Elam, the latest Assyrian conquest, was
threatened by the Persians, and a new and ferocious
enemy had appeared in the north. These were the
Scythians, who had descended upon the civilised world
from the steppes of Southern Russia. They extended
their ravages as far as Palestine, and their occupation of
Beth-Shan caused it to be known in later days as
Scythopolis, <q>the city of the Scythians.</q> The earlier
<pb n='132'/><anchor id='Pg132'/>
prophecies of Jeremiah refer to the miseries inflicted on
the country by these barbarians, who must have entered
it towards the middle of Josiah's reign. By this time
the authority of Assyria in the west could have been but
nominal. Nineveh itself had undergone a siege at the
hands of the Medes, and was only saved from utter
destruction by the Scythian irruption. Hence we can
understand how it was that Josiah was able to re-unite
the monarchy of David, and extend his sway over what
had once been the kingdom of Samaria. There was no
longer an Assyrian governor to forbid his overthrowing
the altar at Bethel or the <q>houses of the high places
that were in the cities of Samaria.</q>
</p>

<p>
The date of the final fall and destruction of Nineveh
is not certain, and much depends on the interpretation
given to the words <q>the king of Assyria</q> in 2 Kings
xxiii. 29. If, as is usually supposed, these really signify
the king of Babylon, who had succeeded to the power
of Assyria, we may place the fall of the Assyrian
capital in <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 610; otherwise the date must be as late
as <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 606. It cannot be later, since, when Jeremiah
reviews in this year the existing nations of the east
(xxv. 19-26), he says not a word about either Nineveh
or Assyria. The vengeance the prophets had predicted
for the Assyrians had already fallen upon them. What
it was to be like we may gather from the language of
Nahum.
</p>

<p>
The last king of Assyria was Esar-haddon II, called
Sarakos by the Greek writers. He has left us a few
records, which were written when his enemies were
gathering about him, and when his people were vainly
calling upon their gods for help. The Medes, the Minni,
the Kimmerians or Gomer, had all banded themselves
<pb n='133'/><anchor id='Pg133'/>
together, and were steadily approaching Nineveh. The
frontier cities had been stormed, and the enemy was
spreading like an inundation over the whole country.
In their despair the Assyrian rulers ordained a solemn
fast of 100 days and 100 nights, and besought the Sun-god
to pardon their sin. But all was in vain. The
measure of the iniquities of Assyria was filled up; the
time had come when the desolater should himself be
desolate, and Nineveh, as God's prophets had threatened,
was laid utterly waste.<note place='foot'><p>The following
chronological table will enable the reader to understand
without difficulty the order of the events described in the preceding
chapter:&mdash;
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>
</p>
<p>
1130. Reign of Tiglath-Pileser I, in Assyria: campaigns in Syria and
Cilicia.
</p>
<p>
900. Recovery of Assyria after a period of decline.
</p>
<p>
858. Accession of Shalmaneser II.
</p>
<p>
853. Battle of Karkar.
</p>
<p>
851. Death of Ahab.
</p>
<p>
850. Campaign of Shalmaneser against Hadadezer (Ben-hadad II).
</p>
<p>
845. Campaign against Hadadezer.
</p>
<p>
843. Murder of Hadadezer by Hazael.
</p>
<p>
841. Campaign against Hazael; tribute paid to Shalmaneser by Jehu.
</p>
<p>
823. Shalmaneser II succeeded by Samas-Rimmon.
</p>
<p>
810. Samas-Rimmon succeeded by Rimmon-nirari.
</p>
<p>
804. Damascus captured by the Assyrians: tribute paid by Samaria.
</p>
<p>
781. Rimmon-nirari succeeded by Shalmaneser III.
</p>
<p>
773. Campaign against Damascus.
</p>
<p>
745. April. Pul, who takes the name of Tiglath-Pileser II, usurps the
Assyrian throne.
</p>
<p>
743-40. War with Hamath; submission of Uzziah; fall of Arpad.
</p>
<p>
738. Tribute paid to the Assyrians by Menahem and Rezon.
</p>
<p>
734. Damascus besieged; the tribes beyond the Jordan carried away;
Jehoahaz (Ahaz) of Judah becomes an Assyrian vassal.
</p>
<p>
733 (? 729). Pekah put to death; Hosea succeeds.
</p>
<p>
732. Damascus taken; Rezon slain. Ahaz at Damascus.
</p>
<p>
727. Tiglath-Pileser succeeded by Shalmaneser IV.
</p>
<p>
722. Sargon seizes the throne and captures Samaria.
</p>
<p>
721. Merodach-baladan conquers Babylonia.
</p>
<p>
720. Hamath conquered; Sabako (So) of Egypt defeated at Raphia.
</p>
<p>
712. Embassy of Merodach-baladan to Hezekiah.
</p>
<p>
711. Capture of Jerusalem and Ashdod by Sargon.
</p>
<p>
710. Merodach-baladan driven from Babylonia.
</p>
<p>
705. Murder of Sargon; his son Sennacherib succeeds on the 12th of
Ab.
</p>
<p>
704. Merodach-baladan holds Babylon for six months.
</p>
<p>
701. Campaign against Judah; battle of Eltekeh; retreat of Sennacherib
from Jerusalem.
</p>
<p>
681. Murder of Sennacherib; accession of Esar-haddon.
</p>
<p>
676. Manasseh appears among the Assyrian tributaries. Egypt conquered.
</p>
<p>
670. Assur-bani-pal (Sardanapalus) associated in the government on the
12th of Iyyar.
</p>
<p>
668. Esar-haddon dies; Assur-bani-pal succeeds on the 27th of Ab.
</p>
<p>
665. Destruction of Thebes (No-Amun) by the Assyrians.
</p>
<p>
?606. Fall of Nineveh, Esar-haddon II or Sarakos being the last king.
</p></note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='135'/><anchor id='Pg135'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VII. Nebuchadrezzar and Cyrus.</head>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>Rise of the Babylonian
empire.&mdash;Media.&mdash;Pharaoh-Necho.&mdash;The battle of
Carchemish.&mdash;Nebuchadrezzar ascends the throne.&mdash;The splendour of
Babylon.&mdash;No monuments yet discovered recording Nebuchadrezzar's Jewish
and Syrian campaigns.&mdash;Evil-Merodach.&mdash;Clay documents recently discovered
in Babylonia.&mdash;New light thrown on the empire of Cyrus.&mdash;The
cylinder of Cyrus.&mdash;Cyrus not a monotheist.&mdash;The Babylonian King of
Isaiah xiv.&mdash;Cyrus not a King of Persia at all.&mdash;Babylon not besieged by
Cyrus.&mdash;How Cyrus came to let the Jews return.&mdash;Correspondence between
the language of Cyrus and of Scripture.&mdash;<q>The god who raises the dead to
life.</q>&mdash;Prayer after a bad dream.&mdash;Babylonian penitential psalms.&mdash;A
translation of one of them.&mdash;Chronological table of the events of the
chapter.</hi>
</quote>

<p>
The empire of Babylonia arose out of the ashes of the
empire of Assyria. While the bands of the enemy were
gathering round the doomed city of Nineveh, Nabopolassar,
the viceroy of Babylonia, seized the opportunity
for revolt. There were no armies now, as in former
days, that could pour out of the gates of the Assyrian
capital to punish the rebel, and Nabopolassar was
allowed to establish his new monarchy undisturbed.
But the fall of the imperial city left the other provinces
of the Assyrian empire without a master or a defence.
Its latest conquest, Elam, seems to have recovered its
independence for a short time&mdash;at all events, Jeremiah
(xxv. 25) in the year 606 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> speaks of <q>the kings of
Elam</q>&mdash;but elsewhere its possessions became the battle-ground
of the three rival powers of Babylon, of Media,
and of Egypt.
</p>

<pb n='136'/><anchor id='Pg136'/>

<p>
Media was the name given by Persian and Greek
writers to the kingdom of Ekbatana, a city now represented
by Hamadan. Its native name, at all events in
the time of Sargon, was Ellip, and the title of Media
applied to it in later history seems to have been due
to a confusion between the Assyrian words <foreign rend='italic'>Madâ</foreign>
<q>Medes,</q> and <foreign rend='italic'>Manda</foreign>, <q>barbarian.</q> As we shall
see, Astyages, the king of Ekbatana, is called <q>the king of
the people of <foreign rend='italic'>Manda</foreign>,</q> or <q>barbarians,</q> by the
Babylonian king Nabonidos. The tablets which describe the
approach of the last enemies of Nineveh draw a careful
distinction between Kaztarit, or Kyaxares, <q>lord of the
city of Car-Cassi,</q> and Mamiti-arsu, <q>lord of the city of
the Medes.</q> For the Assyrians, the Medes were only
the small tribes which inhabited the regions eastward of
Kurdistan. The error, however, which turned the kingdom
of Ekbatana into a kingdom of Media has fixed
itself in literature, and the Old Testament also has
adopted in regard to it the current language of the day.
It is now too late to disturb the time-honoured title, and
we shall therefore continue to speak of a Median empire
and a Median kingdom, even though we now know that
the terms rest on an ancient mistake.
</p>

<p>
As the power of Assyria had dwindled, the power of
Egypt had increased. The Egyptian kings began to
dream again of an Asiatic empire, such as they had once
held in days long gone by, and their first efforts were
directed towards securing afresh the cities of the Philistines.
Gaza and Ashdod were captured after a long
siege;<note place='foot'>See Jer. xlvii. 1.</note> Cyprus became an Egyptian province, and
Pharaoh Necho, whose Phœnician fleet had circumnavigated
Africa, set about the task of conquering Asia.
<pb n='137'/><anchor id='Pg137'/>
Josiah was now on the throne of Judah. He still called
himself a vassal of Assyria, and could not but see with
alarm the rise of a new enemy, just as the old one had
ceased to be formidable. In the name of his suzerain,
therefore, he attempted to bar the advance of Necho;
the two armies of Egypt and Judah met on the plain of
Megiddo, where the battle ended in the death of the
Jewish king and the slaughter of the flower of the
Jewish soldiery. The death of Josiah proved an irremediable
disaster to the Jewish state. He left behind
him a family torn by jealousies and supported by rival
factions, a people hostile to the religious reforms he
had carried through, and an army which had lost both
its leader and its veterans. From henceforth Judah was
no longer able to defend itself from an invader, whether
Egyptian or Babylonian; and even the strong walls of
Jerusalem no longer proved a defence in days when the
method of warfare had changed, and a victorious army
was content to sit down for years before a fortress until
its defenders had been starved out.
</p>

<p>
Necho's triumph, however, was short-lived. Three
years after the battle of Megiddo (<hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 606), he had to
meet the Babylonian army, under its young general
Nebuchadrezzar, the son of Nabopolassar, at the ford
of the Euphrates, which was protected by the old
Hittite city of Carchemish. Nabopolassar was now
independent king of Babylonia, and his son had given
evidence of great military capacities. He had disputed
with the Median kingdom of Ekbatana the possession of
Mesopotamia; and though the ruins of Nineveh and
other Assyrian cities on the eastern bank of the Tigris
continued to remain in the hands of the Median ruler,
as well as the high road which led across Northern
<pb n='138'/><anchor id='Pg138'/>
Mesopotamia into Asia Minor, and passed through the
patriarchal city of Haran, he had secured for his father
the southern regions enclosed between the Tigris and
the Euphrates. The battle of Carchemish finally decided
who should be the master of Western Asia. The
Egyptian forces were completely shattered, and Necho
retreated with the wreck of his army to his ancestral
kingdom. Judah and the countries which adjoined it
passed under the yoke of Babylonia.
</p>

<p>
Two years later, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 604, Nabopolassar died, and
Nebuchadrezzar succeeded to the throne. His name is
written Nabu-kudur-uzur, <q>O Nebo, defend the crown,</q>
in the cuneiform, so that the form Nebuchadrezzar,
which is found in the Book of Jeremiah, is the only
correct one, Nebuchadnezzar being a corruption of it, like
Asnapper for Assur-bani-pal. Nebuchadrezzar was not
only a great general, he was also a great builder and an
able administrator. Under him, Babylon, which had
been little more than a provincial town, became one of
the most splendid cities in the ancient world. In the
middle of it rose the gigantic temple of Bel or Baal, in
eight stages, now represented by a mound of ruins,
which goes under the name of Babil. A winding road
led from the foot of it to the shrine on the summit,
wherein was a golden image of the god, forty feet high,
and a golden table in front of it for the showbread.
Nebuchadrezzar's palace, now called the Kasr mound,
was on a scale equally vast, though the wall that surrounded
it, according to the king's own statement, had
been built in fifteen days; within were the famous
hanging gardens, raised on lofty arcades, and watered
by means of a screw. In the suburb of Borsippa, on
the western side of the Euphrates, stood another temple,
<pb n='139'/><anchor id='Pg139'/>
the modern Birs-i-Nimrud. This was dedicated to
Nebo, and had been begun by an earlier king. But it
was completed by Nebuchadrezzar, who called it <q>the
temple of the seven lights of the earth,</q> and built it in
seven stages, each coloured according to the supposed
colours of the seven planets. The upper stages were
artificially vitrified, wood having been piled up against
the surfaces of the bricks of which they were composed,
and then set on fire. Both Borsippa and Babylon were
surrounded by a single line of fortification, consisting of
a double wall. It was pierced by a hundred gates, all
of bronze. So broad were the walls, that two chariots
could pass one another upon them. Walls were also
built on either side of the river, which flowed through
the centre of the city, and was furnished with handsome
quays. There were gates in these walls at the end of each
of the wide and straight streets by which the city was
intersected, and between every gate a ferry-boat plied.
Besides the ferry-boats there was also a drawbridge,
which was drawn up every night. Such was <q>great
Babylon,</q> which Nebuchadrezzar boasted he had built
<q>for the house of the kingdom, by the might of his
power, and for the honour of his majesty.</q>
</p>

<p>
Records of Nebuchadrezzar's building operations
exist in plenty, but of his annals only a small fragment
has as yet been discovered. This, however, contains an
allusion to his campaign in Egypt, of which Jeremiah
and Ezekiel prophesied, and which an over-hasty
criticism has denied. The campaign, we learn, took
place in the thirty-seventh year of his reign. Other
references to it have been detected on the Egyptian
monuments, and we gather from these that the Babylonian
army swept the whole of the northern part of
<pb n='140'/><anchor id='Pg140'/>
Egypt, and penetrated as far south as Assouan, from
whence they were forced to retreat by the Egyptian
general Hor. Amasis was at this time king of Egypt,
having dethroned and murdered Apries, the Pharaoh
Hophra of the Bible, whose miserable end had been
foretold by Jeremiah (xliv. 30).
</p>

<p>
No account has yet been discovered among the
cuneiform documents of the campaigns of Nebuchadrezzar
against Tyre and Judah. But a curious memorial
of them was found two years ago on the northern bank
of the Nahr el-Kelb, or Dog River, about eight miles to
the north of Beyrût. The ancient high road from
Damascus to the sea-coast led along the gorge through
which this river makes its way to the sea, and traces
of it can still be seen cut here and there in the rock.
The foreign conquerors of Asia, whether Egyptian or
Assyrian have left monuments of themselves carved
by the side of this old road, where it winds round a
promontory that forms the southern bank of the river.
Ramses II, Sennacherib, Esar-haddon, all have recorded
their names and deeds upon the face of the
cliff; and the obliterated monuments of other and
perhaps older kings may still be seen near to them.
The existence of these monuments has long been known.
But it was never suspected that a long inscription of
Nebuchadrezzar also existed on the loftier cliff on the
northern side of the river, completely concealed from
view under a mass of luxuriant shrubs and drooping
maiden-hair fern. It was brought to light by an accident,
and though much injured by time and weather is
still partly decipherable. Unfortunately, the royal author
gives no history in it of his Syrian and Jewish campaigns;
the clearest part of the text is occupied only with
<pb n='141'/><anchor id='Pg141'/>
a list of the wines of the Lebanon, among which the wine
of Helbon, near Damascus, was the most highly prized.<note place='foot'>Compare
Ezek. xxvii. 18.</note>
</p>

<p>
Nebuchadrezzar had a long reign of nearly forty-three
years. His son and successor, Evil-Merodach (<q>the
man of the god Merodach</q>), lived hardly three years
after his accession, and then was murdered by his
brother-in-law, Nergal-sharezer, who seized the crown.
The latter calls himself the son of <q>Bel-suma-iskun,
king of Babylon</q>&mdash;a title to which his father could
have had no right&mdash;and he seems to have been the Rab-Mag
(a word of unknown signification) who is mentioned
by Jeremiah (xxxix. 3) as among the princes of
Babylon at the time of the capture of Jerusalem. The
chief event of his short reign of four years and four
months was the construction of a new palace. His
son, who succeeded him, was but a mere boy, and was
murdered after a brief reign of four months. The
throne was then usurped by Nabu-nahid, the Nabonidos
of the Greeks, who does not seem to have belonged to
the royal family, and calls his father, <q>Nabu-balatsu-ikbi,
the <foreign rend='italic'>Rubu-emga</foreign>,</q> which may possibly be the Rab-Mag
of the Old Testament. Nabonidos reigned for
seventeen years, and witnessed the rise of a new power
in the east. This was the empire of Cyrus, about whom
the cuneiform records have recently given us information
of a most startling kind.
</p>

<p>
Among the clay documents lately discovered in
Babylonia by Mr. Rassam are three inscriptions, which
have been published and translated by Sir Henry Rawlinson
and Mr. Pinches. The first of these is a cylinder,
inscribed by order of Cyrus, the second a tablet which
describes the conquest of Babylonia by Cyrus and the
<pb n='142'/><anchor id='Pg142'/>
causes which led up to it, while the third is an account
given by Nabonidos of his restoration of the temple of
the Moon-god at Haran, and of the temples of the
Sun-god and of Anunit at Sepharvaim. Haran, we are
told in the last-mentioned record, had been taken and
destroyed by the <foreign rend='italic'>Manda</foreign>, or <q>barbarians,</q> of
Ekbatana, and the temple of the Moon-god had shared in the
general ruin of the city. <q>Then,</q> says Nabonidos, <q>at the
beginning of my long reign, Merodach, the great lord, and
Sin (the Moon-god), the illuminator of heaven and earth,
the strong one of the universe, revealed unto me a dream.
Merodach spake with me (thus): <q>O Nabonidos, king of
Babylon, go up with the horse of thy chariot; make
bricks for the Temple of Rejoicing, and let the seat of
Sin, the great lord, enter within it.</q> Reverently I spake
to Merodach, the lords of the gods: <q>I will build this
house whereof thou hast spoken. The barbarians went
about it, and their forces were terrible.</q> Merodach
answered me: <q>The barbarians of whom thou hast
spoken shall not exist, neither they nor their lands, nor
the kings their allies.</q> In the third year when it came,
when they (<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, the barbarians) had caused Cyrus, the
king of Elam, his young servant, to march amongst his
army, they provoked him (to battle); the wide-spread
barbarians he overthrew; he captured Astyages, king of
the barbarians, and seized his treasures; to his own
land he took (them).</q> After this Nabonidos carried
out the will of the gods. His <q>vast army</q> was summoned
from Gaza on the one side to the Persian Gulf
on the other, and set to work to restore the temple of
Haran, which had been built three centuries before by
the Assyrian king, Shalmaneser II, and subsequently
repaired by Assur-bani-pal.
</p>

<pb n='143'/><anchor id='Pg143'/>

<p>
Two statements will be noticed in the inscription
which will appear strange to students of ancient history.
Cyrus is called <q>the young servant</q> of Merodach, the
patron-deity of Babylon, and <q>king of Anzan,</q> or
Elam, not of Persia. But both statements will be found
to be borne out by the two inscriptions of Cyrus himself,
which we shall now quote. Both on his cylinder and
in the annalistic tablet Cyrus, hitherto supposed to be a
Persian and a Zoroastrian monotheist, appears as an
Elamite and as a polytheist.
</p>

<p>
The annalistic tablet, which is unfortunately somewhat
mutilated, begins with the first year of the reign
of Nabonidos. The first three years after his accession
seem to have been occupied with disturbances in
Syria. Then, in the sixth year, we are informed,
<q>Astyages gathered (his army) and marched against
Cyrus, king of Elam. But the soldiers of Astyages
revolted from him, and seized him and delivered him up
to Cyrus. Cyrus (proceeded) to the land of Ekbatana,
the royal city. The silver, the gold, the furniture, and
the spoil of the land of Ekbatana he carried away, and
brought the furniture and the spoil which he has taken
to the land of Elam.&mdash;The seventh year the king
(Nabonidos) was in the town of Tema (a suburb of
Babylon). The king's son, the nobles, and his soldiers
were in Accad (or Northern Babylonia). The king did
not go to Babylon, neither did Nebo nor Bel. But they
kept a festival; they sacrificed peace-offerings in the
temples of Saggil and Zida to the gods for (the preservation)
of Babylon and Borsippa. The governor inspected
the garden and the temple.&mdash;In the eighth year (no event
took place).&mdash;The ninth year Nabonidos, the king, was
in Tema, the king's son, the nobles, and his soldiers
<pb n='144'/><anchor id='Pg144'/>
were in Accad. Until the month of Nisan (March) the
king did not go to Babylon, neither did Nebo nor Bel.
But they kept a festival; they sacrificed peace-offerings
to the gods in the temples of Saggil and Zida
for the preservation of Babylon and Borsippa. On the
fifth day of Nisan, the king's mother, who was in the
fortress of the camp on the river Euphrates, above
Sippara, died. The king's son and his soldiers mourned
for her three days running. In the month Sivan (May),
there was a mourning for the king's mother throughout
the land of Accad. In the month Nisan, Cyrus, king of
Persia, collected his soldiers and crossed the Tigris
below Arbela, and the following month (marched)
against the land of.... Its king took (his)
silver and himself; he made his own children mount
(the pyre); afterwards both king and children were
(burnt) in the midst (of it)&mdash;The tenth year the king
was in Tema; the king's son, the officers, and his
soldiers were in Accad. Until (Nisan) the king (did
not go to Babylon), neither did Nebo nor Bel. But
they kept the festival; they sacrificed peace-offerings to
the gods in the temples (of Saggil and Zida) for the
preservation of Babylon and Borsippa. On the 21st
day of Sivan (the soldiers) of Elam marched into
Accad. A prefect (was appointed?) in Erech.&mdash;The
eleventh year the king was in Tema; the king's son,
the nobles, and his soldiers were in Accad. Until Elul
(August), the king did not come forth (to worship) Bel,
but they kept the festival; they sacrificed peace-offerings
(to the gods in the temples of Saggil and
Zida for the preservation of) Babylon and Borsippa.</q>
</p>

<p>
Here a break occurs in the record. When the inscription
becomes legible again we find ourselves transported
<pb n='145'/><anchor id='Pg145'/>
to the seventeenth year of Nabonidos, when the tribes on
<q>the lower sea</q> or Persian Gulf were in revolt. Cyrus,
who had failed to break through the Babylonian army in
Accad, had spent his time in intriguing with a disaffected
party&mdash;probably the Jews&mdash;within Babylonia itself, and
at last, when all was ripe, prepared to attack his enemy
from the south-east. Nabonidos now turned to the
gods for help, and had the images of them brought to
Babylon from their various shrines, in the vain hope that
their presence would save the city from capture. <q>The
gods of Marad, Zamama and the gods of Kis, Beltis
and the gods of Kharsak-kalama, were brought to
Babylon; up to the end of Elul, the gods of Accad
which are above and below the sky were brought to
Babylon but the gods of Borsippa, of Cuthah, and of
Sippara, were not brought. In the month Tammuz
(June) Cyrus gave battle to the army of Accad in the
town of Rutum, upon the river Nizallat. The men of
Accad broke into revolt. On the 14th day (of the
month) the garrison of Sippara was taken without
fighting. Nabonidos flies. On the 16th day Gobryas,
the governor of Gutium (Kurdistan) and the army of
Cyrus entered Babylon without fighting. Afterwards
he takes Nabonidos, and puts him into fetters in
Babylon. Up to the end of the month Tammuz, some
rebels from Kurdistan kept the gates of the temple of
Saggil closed, but there was nothing in the way of
weapons in the temple of Saggil, nor was there
an opportunity (for fighting). On the 3rd day of
Marchesvan (October), Cyrus entered Babylon. The
roads(?) before him were covered. He grants peace to
the city, to the whole of Babylon Cyrus proclaims
peace. Gobryas, his governor, was appointed over the
<pb n='146'/><anchor id='Pg146'/>
(other) governors in Babylon, and from the month Chisleu
(November) to the month Adar (February) the gods
of Accad, whom Nabonidos had brought to Babylon,
were restored to their shrines. On the 11th day of
the previous Marchesvan, Gobryas (was appointed) over
(Babylon), and the king (Nabonidos) died. From the
27th of Adar to the 3rd of Nisan, (there was) a
mourning in Accad; all the people smote their heads.
On the 4th day, Kambyses, the son of Cyrus, arranged
the burial in the temple of the Sceptre of the World.
The priests of the temple of the Sceptre of Nebo went
(to it).</q> The rest of the text, which is very imperfect
from this point, describes the honours paid by Cyrus
and his son to the Babylonian gods, their sacrifices of
victims to Bel, and their restoration of Nebo to his old
shrine.
</p>

<p>
It is at this place that the cylinder of Cyrus
comes in to complete the story. Cyrus here says that
Nabonidos had neglected the worship of the gods, who
accordingly were angry with him: <q>The gods dwelling
within them left their shrines in anger when (Nabonidos)
brought them into Babylon. Merodach went about to all
men, wherever were their seats; and the men of Sumer
and Accad, whom he had sworn should attend him
(besought him to return). The favour he granted, he
came back; all lands, even the whole of them, rejoiced
and ate. And he appointed a king to guide aright in
the heart what his hand upholds; Cyrus, king of
Elam, he proclaimed by name for the sovereignty:
all men everywhere commemorate his name. The
men of Kurdistan and all the barbarians (of Ekbatana)
he made bow down to his feet, the men of the
black-headed race (the Accadians), whom he had conquered
<pb n='147'/><anchor id='Pg147'/>
with his hand, he governed in justice and
righteousness. Merodach, the great lord, the restorer of
his people, beheld with joy the deeds of his vicegerent,
who was righteous in hand and heart. To his city of
Babylon he summoned his march, and he bade him take
the road to Babylon; like a friend and a comrade he
went at his side. The weapons of his vast army, whose
number, like the waters of a river, could not be known,
he marshalled at his side. Without fighting or battle
he caused him to enter into Babylon; his city of Babylon
feared; in a place difficult of access Nabonidos, the
king, who worshipped him not, he gave into his hand.
The men of Babylon, all of them, (and) the whole of
Sumer and Accad, the nobles and priests who had
revolted, kissed his feet, they rejoiced in his sovereignty,
their faces shone. The god who in his ministry raises
the dead to life, who benefits all men in difficulty and
prayer, has in goodness drawn nigh to him, has made
strong his name. I am Cyrus, the king of legions, the
great king, the powerful king, the king of Babylon,
the king of Sumer and Accad, the king of the four
zones, the son of Kambyses the great king, the king of
Elam; the grandson of Cyrus the great king, the king
of Elam; the great-grandson of Teispes, the great king,
the king of Elam; of the ancient seed-royal, whose
rule has been beloved by Bel and Nebo, whose sovereignty
they cherished according to the goodness of their hearts.
At that time I entered Babylon in peace. With joy and
gladness in the palace of the kings I enlarged the seat of
my dominion. Merodach, the great lord, (cheered) the
heart of his servant, whom the sons of Babylon (obeyed
each) year and day.... My vast armies he marshalled
peacefully in the midst of Babylon; throughout
<pb n='148'/><anchor id='Pg148'/>
Sumer and Accad I had no revilers. The sanctuaries
of Babylon and all its fortresses I established in peace.
As for the sons of Babylon ... their ruins I
repaired, and I delivered their prisoners. For the work
(of restoring the shrine) of Merodach, the great lord, I
prepared, and he graciously drew nigh unto me, Cyrus,
the king, his worshipper, and to Kambyses, my son, the
offspring of my heart, and to all my army, and in peace
we duly restored its front (in) glory. All the kings who
dwell in the high-places of all regions from the Upper
Sea to the Lower Sea, who dwell in (the high-places) of
the kings of Phœnicia and Sutar, all of them brought
their rich tribute, and in the midst of Babylon kissed
my feet. From (the city of) ... to the cities of
Assur and Istar ... Accad, Marad, Zamban, Me-Turnat,
and Duran as far as the border of Kurdistan,
the fortresses (which lie) upon the Tigris, wherein from
of old were their seats, I restored the gods who dwelt
within them to their places, and I enlarged (for them)
seats that should be long-enduring; all their peoples I
assembled, and I restored their lands. And the gods of
Sumer and Accad, whom Nabonidos, to the anger of the
lord of gods (Merodach), had brought into Babylon, I
settled in peace in their sanctuaries by the command of
Merodach, the great lord. In the goodness of their
hearts may all the gods whom I have brought into their
strong places daily intercede before Bel and Nebo that
they should grant me length of days; may they bless
my projects with prosperity, and may they say to Merodach
my lord that Cyrus the king, thy worshipper, and
Kambyses his son (deserve his favour).</q>
</p>

<p>
Such are the records, which have risen up, as it were,
out of the tomb, to revolutionise all our previous conceptions
<pb n='149'/><anchor id='Pg149'/>
of that part of ancient history with which they
are concerned. We must give up the belief that Cyrus
was a monotheist, bent on destroying the idols of
Babylon; on the contrary, from the time when we first
hear of him, he is a worshipper of Bel-Merodach, the
patron-god of Babylon, and the first care of himself and
his son, after his conquest of Babylonia, is to restore the
Babylonian gods to the shrines from which they had
been impiously removed by Nabonidos. He asks the
gods to intercede on his behalf with Bel and Nebo, the
two supreme gods of Babylonian worship. It is clear,
therefore, that Cyrus was a polytheist, who, like other
polytheists in other ages, adopted the gods of the
country he had conquered from motives of State
policy. The Egyptian monuments give the same
account of his son Kambyses. They show that the
story told by Herodotus how Kambyses had scoffed at
the gods of Egypt, had destroyed their images, and had
finally stabbed the sacred bull Apis, was a mere Greek
fable. Kambyses appears on contemporaneous monuments
as the friend of the Egyptian priests, the adorer
of their gods, and the benefactor of their temples.
The very bull he was said to have murdered has been
discovered in its huge sarcophagus of granite, with a
sculpture above, wherein Kambyses is represented as
kneeling before the bull-god, while an inscription states
that the bull was honoured with the usual funeral, in
which Kambyses himself took part.
</p>

<p>
The theory, accordingly, which held that Cyrus had
allowed the Jews to return to their own land, because,
like them, he believed in but one supreme god&mdash;the
Ormazd or good spirit of the Zoroastrian creed&mdash;must be
abandoned. God consecrated Cyrus to be His instrument
<pb n='150'/><anchor id='Pg150'/>
in restoring His chosen people to their land, not
because the king of Elam was a monotheist, but
because the period of Jewish trial and punishment had
come to an end. God's instruments may be unworthy
as well as worthy; it was through the hardness of heart
of an unbelieving Pharaoh that the deliverance from
Egypt had been accomplished in days long before. Nor
is there any contradiction between the treatment
actually experienced by the Babylonians and that which
is predicted for them in the Book of Isaiah. The
language of the prophet is necessarily figurative, and
when he declares (Isa. xlvi. 1, 2) that Bel and Nebo had
gone into captivity, nothing more is meant than that
the people whose gods they were, and whom they
represented, had passed under the yoke of a foreign
conqueror.
</p>

<p>
And yet, though the prophet's language was thus
figurative, the prediction was eventually fulfilled in a
very literal way. The empire of Cyrus was broken up
after the death of Kambyses, and had to be reconquered
by Darius the son of Hystaspes, the real founder of the
Persian Empire. Darius was a Zoroastrian monotheist
as well as a Persian, and under him and his successors
polytheism ceased to be the religion of the State.
Twice during his reign he had to besiege Babylon.
Hardly had he been proclaimed king when it revolted
under a certain Nidinta-Bel, who called himself <q>Nebuchadrezzar,
the son of Nabonidos.</q> A cameo exists
with his helmeted profile, engraved by a Greek artist,
and surrounded by the words, <q>To Merodach, his lord,
Nebuchadrezzar, the king of Babylon, has made (it)
for his life;</q> unless, perhaps, Professor Schrader is right
in referring the portrait, not to the pretender, but to
<pb n='151'/><anchor id='Pg151'/>
the real Nebuchadrezzar of Biblical history. Babylon
endured a siege of two years, and was at last captured
by Darius only by the help of a stratagem. Six years
afterwards it again rose in revolt, under an Armenian,
who professed, like his predecessor, to be <q>Nebuchadrezzar,
the son of Nabonidos.</q> Once more, however, it
was besieged and taken, and this time the pretender
was put to death by impalement. His predecessor,
Nidinta-Bel, seems to have been slain while the Persian
troops were forcing their way into the captured city.
After the second capture of Babylon Darius pulled
down its walls; and his son Xerxes completed the
work of destruction by destroying the great temple
of Bel, and carrying away the golden image of the
god.
</p>

<p>
In Nidinta-Bel the line of independent Babylonian
kings may be regarded as having come to an end, since
the leader of the second revolt was not a native, but an
Armenian settler. To him, therefore, we may apply
the magnificent description of the death of the last
Babylonian monarch on the battle-field, and his descent
into the under-world, which we read in Isaiah xiv.
Illustrations have been taken by the prophet from
Babylonian mythology, in order to heighten the horror
of the scene. The king of Babylonia is compared to the
morning star, whose movements the Babylonians had
been the first of mankind to record. He is represented
as saying in his heart, <q>I will ascend into heaven, I will
exalt my throne above the (other) stars of God: I will
sit also upon the mount of the assembly (of the gods)
in the furthest regions of the north.</q> This mount, as
we have seen in an earlier chapter, was the Olympos of
the Accadians, by whom it was called Kharsak-kurra
<pb n='152'/><anchor id='Pg152'/>
<q>the mountain of the east.</q> Its peak was the pivot on
which the sky rested, and it was therefore also known as
<q>the mountain of the world.</q> It lay far away in the
regions of the north-east, the entrance, as it was
supposed, to the lower world, and it was sometimes
identified with the mountain of Nizir, the modern
Rowandiz, on whose summit the ark of the Chaldean
Noah was believed to have rested. From the heights of
this mountain, where he had vainly dreamed of sitting
among the gods, the Babylonian king was to be hurled
into the world below. Here again the prophet borrows
his illustration from the mythology of Accad. The
heroes of the past are placed before us seated in Hades
on their shadowy thrones, from which they rise to greet
the arrival of their new comrade.
</p>

<p>
The best commentary on the description is to be found
in the words of an old Babylonian poem, which tells of
the descent of the goddess Istar into Hades, in search
of her dead husband Tammuz. The poem opens as
follows:&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>To Hades, the land whence none return, the land of darkness,</q></l>
<l>Istar the daughter of the Moon-god inclined her ear,</l>
<l>Yea, the daughter of the Moon-god inclined her ear.</l>
<l>To the house of darkness, the dwelling of the god Irkalla,</l>
<l>To the house out of which there is no exit,</l>
<l>To the road from which there is no return,</l>
<l>To the house from whose entrance the light is taken,</l>
<l>The place where dust is their nourishment, and mud their food;</l>
<l><q rend='post'>Light is never seen, in darkness they dwell.</q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Parallel with this is the description of Hades, supposed
to be given by the dead friend of Gisdhubar, in the
<pb n='153'/><anchor id='Pg153'/>
great Chaldean epic in which the account of the deluge
is embodied. Here we read&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>To Hades, the land whence none return, I turn myself,</q></l>
<l>I spread like a bird my hands.</l>
<l>I descend, I descend, to the house of darkness, the dwelling of the god Irkalla.</l>
<l>To the house out of which there is no exit.</l>
<l>To the road from which there is no return,</l>
<l>To the house from whose entrance the light is taken,</l>
<l>The place where dust is their nourishment, and mud their food,</l>
<l>And its chiefs are like birds covered with feathers;</l>
<l>Light is never seen, in darkness they dwell.</l>
<l>In that house, O my friend, which I shall enter.</l>
<l>There is treasured up for me a crown.</l>
<l>With those wearing crowns, who from days of old ruled the earth.</l>
<l><q rend='post'>To whom the gods Anu and Bel have given names of rule.</q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
But it is time for us to return to the inscriptions
of Cyrus. Next to the fact that he was a polytheist,
the most startling revelation they make is that he was
not a king of Persia at all. Persia seems to have been
acquired by him after his conquest of Astyages, at some
time between the sixth and ninth year of Nabonidos.
Both he and his ancestors were kings of Anzan or Elam.
It is true, he could trace his descent back to a member
of the royal Persian clan, Teispes, who appears to have
taken possession of Elam during the troublous period
that followed the fall of Assyria, and to have resigned
his Persian dominions to his son Ariaramnes, the
great-grandfather of Darius. It must be this conquest
of Elam which was prophesied by Jeremiah at the
<pb n='154'/><anchor id='Pg154'/>
beginning of Zedekiah's reign (Jer. xlix. 34-39), and
the result of it was to make Cyrus an Elamite in education
and religion. The empire which he founded was
not a Persian one; Darius, the son of Hystaspes, was
the real founder of that. It was only as the predecessor
of Darius, and for the sake of intelligibility to the readers
of a later day, that Cyrus could be called a king of
Persia, as he is in the Book of Ezra, where the original
words of his proclamation, <q>king of Elam</q> have been
changed into the more familiar and intelligible <q>king of
Persia</q> (Ez. i. 2.). Elsewhere in the Bible (Isa. xxi.
1-10), where the invasion of Babylonia is described,
there is no mention of Persia, only of Elam and Media,
that is to say, of the ancestral dominions of Cyrus and
that kingdom of Ekbatana which he had annexed.
This is in strict accordance with the revelations of the
monuments, and is a most interesting testimony to
the accuracy of the Old Testament records.
</p>

<p>
Another fact of an equally revolutionary kind which
the inscriptions teach us is that Babylon was not
besieged and taken by Cyrus. It opened its gates to his
general long before he came near it, and needed neither
fighting nor battle for its occupation. It thus becomes
evident that the siege of Babylon described by Herodotus
really belongs to the reign of Darius, and has
been transferred by tradition to the reign of Cyrus, and
that the late Mr. Bosanquet was right in asserting that
the Darius of the Book of Daniel is Darius the son of
Hystaspes. Belshazzar, as we know from an inscription
of Nabonidos, which mentions him, was the eldest
son of that monarch, and he is no doubt the <q>king's
son</q> who commanded the Babylonian army, according
to the tablet translated above.
</p>

<pb n='155'/><anchor id='Pg155'/>

<p>
But besides the main facts to be derived from these
newly found inscriptions, there is much else in them which
is worthy of regard. This is especially the case with the
inscription on the clay cylinder, in which we find a
reference to the restoration of the Babylonian captives
to their several homes. The experience of Cyrus had
taught him that the old Assyrian and Babylonian
system of transporting conquered nations was an error,
and did but introduce a dangerously disaffected people
into the country to which they had been brought.
Through this conviction, which seemed to Cyrus himself
merely the result of his own experience and political
sagacity, God worked to bring about the fulfilment of
His promises to the Jewish exiles. Those who chose to
return to Jerusalem were allowed to do so, and there
rebuild a fortress which Cyrus considered would be
useful to him as a check upon Egypt. The nations
which had been brought from east and west were
restored to their lands, along with their gods, whom they
were henceforth to worship in peace. Among them, as
we learn from the Old Testament, were the captives of
Judah, the worshippers of the one true God.
</p>

<p>
Another fact which we gather from the words of Cyrus
is that Nabonidos had offended the Babylonian priesthood,
and had been accused by some of them of impiety.
His removal of the images of the local deities from
their shrines seems to have been regarded as a peculiar
sin; and Cyrus goes so far as to assert that Nabonidos
had brought them into Babylon, <q>to the anger of the
lord of gods.</q> Indeed, he even says that the Babylonian
king had not worshipped the patron god of his
own capital. How little, however, this statement was
really justified may be seen from the inscription of
<pb n='156'/><anchor id='Pg156'/>
Nabonidos quoted above, in which reference is made
for the first time to Cyrus, <q>the young servant</q> of
Merodach.
</p>

<p>
The language used of himself by Cyrus reminds us
sometimes of the inspired words in which he is spoken
of in the prophecies of Isaiah. When he says that he
<q>governed in justice and righteousness,</q> and that Merodach
<q>beheld with joy the deeds of his vicegerent, who
was righteous in hand and heart,</q> we cannot help
thinking of God's declaration that He had <q>raised him
up in righteousness,</q> (Isa. xlv. 13). When he says that
<q>Merodach, who in his ministry raises the dead to life,
who benefits all men in difficulty and prayer, has in
goodness drawn nigh to him, has made strong his name,</q>
we almost fancy we hear an echo of the words of
Scripture: <q>For Jacob My servant's sake, and Israel
Mine elect, I have even called thee by thy name; I have
surnamed thee, though thou hast not known Me. I am
the LORD, and there is none else, there is no God beside
Me. I girded thee, though thou hast not known Me</q>
(Isa. xlv. 4, 5).
</p>

<p>
The title given to Merodach&mdash;<q>the god who raises
the dead to life</q>&mdash;is a remarkable one, but it was a title
which was applied to the god as early as the Accadian
epoch. In the religious hymns of the Accadians, Merodach
plays the part of a mediator and intercessor; if
the gods are angry, it is Merodach who intercedes for
man. Mankind, in fact, are his especial care; he was
supposed to heal their diseases and to raise them after
death to life. Whether there was any reference here to
the doctrine of the resurrection is doubtful: more probably
nothing further was meant than that the spirit
of the dead man, through the help of Merodach, was
<pb n='157'/><anchor id='Pg157'/>
allowed to drink of <q>the waters of life,</q> that bubbled up
in Hades beneath the golden throne of the spirits of
earth, and so to ascend to the Accadian heaven, <q>the
land of the silver sky,</q> where the heroes lay reclined
among the gods on couches, feasting at banquets which
knew no end.
</p>

<p>
Merodach was originally the Sun-god, and when
Babylonia passed into the hands of the Semites he
still continued to be worshipped, as the interceding god
who hears prayers and <q>raises the dead to life.</q> But he
was now more specially honoured as Bel or Baal, <q>lord</q>
a title which properly belonged to an older deity, but
which came in time to be almost confined to Merodach,
alone. When Bel and Nebo are mentioned together in
the Bible (Isa. xlvi. 1), it is Merodach, the tutelary
divinity of Babylon, that is meant, Nebo, <q>the prophet,</q>
to whom peculiar honour was paid at Babylon after the
rise of the dynasty of Nebuchadrezzar, being usually
associated with him.
</p>

<p>
A large number of prayers have been discovered
addressed for the most part to Merodach, though there
are some which are addressed also to the other deities.
These prayers are written in Assyrian, and constitute a
sort of manual of devotion. They are seldom of great
length, one of the longest being a prayer after a bad
dream, which is, however, addressed to the goddess
Istar as well as to Merodach. Portions of it have been
lost; what remains may be quoted as an example of
this species of literature, and is as follows: <q>May the
lord set my prayer at rest, (may he remove) my heavy
(sin)! May the lord (grant) a return of favour. By
day direct unto death all that disquiets me. O my
goddess, be gracious unto me; when (wilt thou hear)
<pb n='158'/><anchor id='Pg158'/>
my prayer? May they pardon my sin, my wickedness,
(and) my transgression. May the exalted one deliver,
may the holy one love. May the seven winds carry
away my groaning. May the worm lay it low, may the
bird bear it upwards to heaven. May a shoal of fish
carry it away; may the river bear it along. May the
creeping thing of the field come unto me; may the
waters of the river as they flow cleanse me. Enlighten
me like a mask of gold. Food and drink perpetually
before thee may I get. Heap up the worm, take away
his life. The steps of thine altar, thy many ones, may
I ascend. With the worm make me pass, and may I
be kept with thee. Make me to be fed, and may a
favourable dream come. May the dream I dream
be favourable; may the dream I dream be fulfilled,
May the dream I dream turn to prosperity. May
Makhir, the god of dreams, settle upon my head.
Let me enter Beth-Saggil, the palace of the gods,
the temple of the lord. Give me unto Merodach,
the merciful, to prosperity, even to prospering hands.
May thy entering be exalted, may thy divinity be
glorious; may the men of my city extol thy mighty deeds.</q>
</p>

<p>
The tone of this prayer is not very high, and it
reveals how much superstition was mixed with even
the best aspirations of Assyrian spiritual life. It is,
therefore, somewhat surprising that a series of penitential
psalms exists, coming down from the earliest period
of Babylonian history, which breathe a much more
exalted and purer spirit. These psalms are not
written in Accadian, but in the closely-allied dialect
of Sumer or Shinar, and an Assyrian interlinear
translation is attached to them. From time to time
expressions that occur in them remind us of the Book
<pb n='159'/><anchor id='Pg159'/>
of Psalms. No more suitable way can be found of
concluding our review of the illustrations of the Old
Testament Scriptures afforded by modern discovery,
than by giving at full length a translation of one of
these touching relics of old time. In reading it we do
indeed feel that even in the darkest ages of ignorance
and heathenism God was still moving the hearts of men,
<q>that they should seek the Lord, if haply they might
feel after Him and find Him:</q>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>My Lord is wroth in his heart; may he be appeased again.</q></l>
<l>May God be appeased again, for I knew not that I sinned.</l>
<l>May Istar, my mother, be appeased again, for I knew not that I sinned.</l>
<l>God knoweth that I knew not; may he be appeased.</l>
<l>Istar, my mother, knoweth that I knew not; may she be appeased.</l>
<l>May the heart of my God be appeased.</l>
<l>May the heart of Istar, my mother, be appeased.</l>
<l>May God and Istar, my mother, be appeased.</l>
<l>May God cease from his anger.</l>
<l>May Istar, my mother, (cease from her anger).</l>
<l>The transgression (I committed my God) knew.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 10'>[The next few lines are obliterated.]</l>
<l>The transgression (I committed Istar, my mother, knew).</l>
<l>(My tears) I drink like the waters of the sea.</l>
<l>That which was forbidden by my God, I ate without knowing.</l>
<l>That which was forbidden by Istar, my mother, I trampled on without knowing.</l>
<l>O my Lord, my transgression is great, many are my sins.</l>
<l>O my God, my transgression is great, many are my sins.</l>
<l>O Istar, my mother, my transgression is great, many are my sins.</l>
<l>O my God, who knowest that I knew not, my transgression is great, many are my sins.</l>
<pb n='160'/><anchor id='Pg160'/>
<l>O Istar, my mother, who knowest that I knew not, my transgression is great, many are my sins.</l>
<l>The transgression that I committed I knew not.</l>
<l>The sin that I sinned I knew not.</l>
<l>The forbidden thing did I eat.</l>
<l>The forbidden thing did I trample on.</l>
<l>My Lord, in the anger of his heart, has punished me.</l>
<l>God in the strength of his heart has received me.</l>
<l>Istar, my mother, has seized upon me and put me to grief.</l>
<l>God, who knoweth that I knew not, has afflicted me.</l>
<l>Istar, my mother, who knoweth that I knew not, has caused darkness.</l>
<l>I prayed and none takes my hand.</l>
<l>I wept and none held my palm.</l>
<l>I cry aloud; but there is none that will hear me.</l>
<l>I am in darkness and hiding, I dare not look up.</l>
<l>To God I refer my distress, I utter my prayer.</l>
<l>The feet of Istar, my mother, I embrace.</l>
<l>To God, who knoweth that I knew not, my prayer I utter.</l>
<l>To Istar, my mother, who knoweth that I knew not, my prayer I address.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 12'>[The next four lines are lost.]</l>
<l>How long, O God (shall I suffer)?</l>
<l>How long, O Istar, my mother (shall I suffer)?</l>
<l>How long, O God, who knoweth that I knew not, (shall I feel thy) strength?</l>
<l>How long, O Istar, my mother, who knoweth that I knew not, shall thy heart (be angry)?</l>
<l>Thou writest the number (?) of mankind, and none knoweth it.</l>
<l>Thou callest man by his name, and what does he know?</l>
<l>Whether he shall be afflicted, or whether he shall be prosperous, there is no man that knows.</l>
<l>O my God, thou givest not rest to thy servant.</l>
<l>In the waters of the raging flood take his hand.</l>
<pb n='161'/><anchor id='Pg161'/>
<l>The sin he has sinned turn into good.</l>
<l>Let the wind carry away the transgression I have committed.</l>
<l>Destroy my manifold wickedness like a garment.</l>
<l>O my God, seven times seven are my transgressions, my transgressions are (ever) before me.<note place='foot'><p>The following
chronological table will assist the reader in understanding
the sequence of events in the preceding chapter:&mdash;
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>
</p>
<p>
609. Battle of Megiddo; Josiah slain; Pharaoh Necho overruns Western
Asia.
</p>
<p>
606. Necho defeated at Carchemish by Nebuchadrezzar; foundation of
the Babylonian empire.
</p>
<p>
604. Nebuchadrezzar succeeds his father Nabopolassar.
</p>
<p>
599. Jerusalem captured; Jehoiachin sent to Babylon.
</p>
<p>
588. Destruction of Jerusalem; murder of Gedaliah.
</p>
<p>
567. The Babylonians overrun Egypt, then governed by Amasis.
</p>
<p>
561. Nebuchadrezzar succeeded by his son Evil-Merodach.
</p>
<p>
559. Nergal-sharezer, son of Bel-sum-iskun, seizes the Babylonian crown.
</p>
<p>
555. Nergal-sharezer succeeded by Laborosoarchod.
</p>
<p>
555. The crown seized by Nabonidos, son of Nabu-balatsu-ikbi.
</p>
<p>
552. The dream of Nabonidos.
</p>
<p>
549. Conquest of Astyages of Ekbatana (Media) by Cyrus, king of Elam.
</p>
<p>
548. Death of <q>the king's mother</q> (Nitokris).
</p>
<p>
538. Overthrow and death of Nabonidos; Cyrus occupies Babylon.
</p>
<p>
529. Death of Cyrus and accession of Kambyses.
</p>
<p>
521. Darius, the son of Hystaspes, elected to the throne of Persia.
</p>
<p>
520-19. Revolt of Babylon under Nidinta-Bel.
</p>
<p>
513. Second revolt of Babylon under Arakha.
</p></note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

</div>

<pb n='162'/><anchor id='Pg162'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Appendix I.</head>

<p>
The text of the Treaty between the Hittites and Ramses II
(Dr. Brugsch's translation):&mdash;
</p>

<p>
In the year 21, in the month of Tybi, on the 21st day of the
month, in the reign of king Ramessu Mi-Amun, the dispenser
of life eternally and for ever, the worshipper of the divinities,
Amun-Ra (of Thebes), Hor-em-khu (of Heliopolis), Ptah (of
Memphis), Mut, the lady of the Asher Lake (near Karnak),
and Khonsu, the peace-loving, there took place a public sitting
on the throne of Horus among the living, resembling his father,
Hor-em-khu in eternity, in eternity, evermore.
</p>

<p>
On that day the king was in the city of Ramses (Zoan), presenting
his peace-offerings to his father, Amun-ra, and to the
gods, Hor-em-khu-Tum, the lord of Heliopolis (On), and to
Amun of Ramessu Mi-Amun, to Ptah of Ramessu Mi-Amun,
and to Sutekh, the strong, the son of Nut, the goddess of
heaven, that they might grant to him many thirty years' jubilee
feasts, and innumerable happy years, and the subjection of all
peoples under his feet for ever.
</p>

<p>
Then came forward the ambassador of the king and the
governor (of his house, by name..., and presented
the ambassadors) of the great king of the Hittites (Khita),
Khita-sir, who were sent to Pharaoh to propose friendship with
the king, Ramessu Mi-Amun, the dispenser of life eternally and
for ever, just as his father, the Sun-god (dispenses it), each day.
</p>

<pb n='163'/><anchor id='Pg163'/>

<p>
This is the copy of the contents of the silver tablet, which
the great king of the Hittites, Khita-sir, had caused to be
made, and which was presented to the Pharaoh by the hand of
his ambassador Tartibus and his ambassador Ra-mes, to propose
friendship to the king, Ramessu Mi-Amun, the bull
among the princes, who places his boundary-marks where it
pleases him in all lands.
</p>

<p>
The treaty which had been proposed by the great king of
the Hittites, Khita-sir, the powerful, the son of Maro-sir, the
great king of the Hittites, the powerful, the grandson of
Sapalili, the great king of the Hittites, the powerful, on the
silver tablet, to Ramessu Mi-Amun, the great prince of Egypt,
the powerful, the grandson of Ramessu I, the great king of
Egypt, the powerful,&mdash;this was a good treaty for friendship and
concord, which assured peace (and established concord) for a
longer period than was previously the case for a long time.
For it was the agreement of the great prince of Egypt in common
with the great king of the Hittites, that the god should
not allow enmity to exist between them, on the basis of a treaty.
</p>

<p>
To wit, in the times of Mauthaner, the great king of the
Hittites, my brother, he was at war with (Meneptah Seti I) the
great prince of Egypt.
</p>

<p>
But now, from this very day forward, Khita-sir, the great
king of the Hittites, shall look upon this treaty, so that the
agreement may remain, which the Sun-god, Ra, has made,
which the god Sutekh has made, for the people of Egypt and
for the people of the Hittites, that there should be no enmity
between them for evermore.
</p>

<p>
And these are the contents:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
Khita-sir, the great king of the Hittites, is in covenant with
Ramessu Mi-Amun, the great prince of Egypt, from this very
<pb n='164'/><anchor id='Pg164'/>
day forward, that there may subsist a good friendship and a
good understanding between them for evermore.
</p>

<p>
He shall be my ally; he shall be my friend. I will be his
ally; I will be his friend; for ever.
</p>

<p>
To wit: in the time of Mauthaner, the great king of the
Hittites, his brother, Khita-sir, after his murder, placed himself
on the throne of his father as the great king of the Hittites.
I strove for friendship with Ramessu Mi-Amun, the great
prince of Egypt, and it is (my wish) that the friendship and
the concord may be better than the friendship and the concord
which before existed, and which was broken.
</p>

<p>
I declare: I, the great king of the Hittites, will hold together
with (Ramessu Mi-Amun) the great prince of Egypt, in good
friendship and good concord. The sons of the sons of the
great king of the Hittites will hold together and be friends
with the sons of the sons of Ramessu Mi-Amun, the great
prince of Egypt.
</p>

<p>
In virtue of our treaty for concord, and in virtue of our
agreement (for friendship, let the people) of Egypt (be bound
in friendship) with the people of the Hittites. Let a like
friendship and a like concord subsist in such measure for ever.
</p>

<p>
Never let enmity rise between them. Never let the great
king of the Hittites invade the land of Egypt, if anything has
been plundered from it (the land of the Hittites). Never let
Ramessu Mi-Amun, the great prince of Egypt, overstep the
boundary of the land (of the Hittites, if anything shall have
been plundered) from it (the land of Egypt).
</p>

<p>
The just treaty which existed in the times of Sapalili, the
great king of the Hittites, likewise the just treaty which existed
in the times of Mauthaner, the great king of the Hittites, my
brother, that will I keep.
</p>

<pb n='165'/><anchor id='Pg165'/>

<p>
Ramessu Mi-Amun, the great prince of Egypt, declares
that he will keep it. (We have come to an understanding
about it) with one another at the same time from this day
forward, and we will fulfil it, and will act in a righteous
manner.
</p>

<p>
If another shall come as an enemy to the lands of Ramessu
Mi-Amun, the great prince of Egypt, then let him send an
embassy to the great king of the Hittites to this effect:
<q>Come, and make me stronger than him.</q> Then shall the
great king of the Hittites (assemble his warriors), and the king
of the Hittites (shall come) and smite his enemies. But if it
should not be the wish of the great king of the Hittites to
march out in person, then he shall send his warriors and his
chariots that they may smite his enemies. Otherwise (he would
incur) the wrath of Ramessu Mi-Amun (the great prince of
Egypt. And if Ramessu Mi-Amun, the great prince of Egypt,
should banish for a crime) subjects from his country, and they
should commit further crime against him, then shall the king
of the Hittites come forward to kill them. The great king of
the Hittites shall act in common with (the great prince of
Egypt).
</p>

<p>
(If another should come as an enemy to the lands of the
great king of the Hittites, then shall he send an embassy to the
great prince of Egypt with the request that) he would come in
great power to kill his enemies; and if it be the intention of
Ramessu Mi-Amun, the great prince of Egypt, (himself) to
come, he shall (smite the enemies of the great king of the
Hittites. If it is not the intention of the great prince of Egypt
to march out in person, then he shall send his warriors and his
two)-horse chariots, while he sends back the answer to the
people of the Hittites.
</p>

<pb n='166'/><anchor id='Pg166'/>

<p>
If any subjects of the great king of the Hittites have offended
him, then Ramessu Mi-Amun (the great prince of Egypt, shall
not receive them in his land, but shall advance to kill them)
... the oath with the wish to say, I will go ...
until ... Ramessu Mi-Amun, the great prince of
Egypt, living for ever ... that he may be given for
them (?) to the lord, and that Ramessu Mi-Amun, the great
prince of Egypt, may speak according to his agreement for
evermore....
</p>

<p>
(If servants shall flee away) out of the territories of Ramessu
Mi-Amun, the great prince of Egypt, to betake themselves to)
the great king of the Hittites, the great king of the Hittites
shall not receive them, but the great king of the Hittites shall
give them up to Ramessu Mi-Amun, the great prince of Egypt
(that they may be punished).
</p>

<p>
If servants of Ramessu Mi-Amun, the great prince of Egypt,
leave his country, and betake themselves to the land of the
Hittites, to make themselves servants of another, they shall not
remain in the land of the Hittites, (but shall be given up) to
Ramessu Mi-Amun, the great prince of Egypt.
</p>

<p>
If, on the other hand, there should flee away (servants of the
great king of the Hittites, in order to betake themselves to)
Ramessu Mi-Amun, the great prince of Egypt, (in order to stay
in Egypt), then those who have come from the land of the
Hittites in order to betake themselves to Ramessu Mi-Amun,
the great prince of Egypt, shall not be (received) by Ramessu
Mi-Amun, the great prince of Egypt, (but) the great prince of
Egypt, Ramessu Mi-Amun, (shall deliver them up to the great
king of the Hittites.
</p>

<p>
And if shall leave the land of the Hittites persons) of skilled
mind, so that they come to the land of Egypt to make themselves
<pb n='167'/><anchor id='Pg167'/>
servants of another, then Ramessu Mi-Amun shall not
allow them to settle, he shall deliver them up to the great
king of the Hittites.
</p>

<p>
When this (treaty) shall be known (by the inhabitants of the
land of Egypt and of the land of the Hittites, then shall they
not offend against it, for all that stands written on) the silver
tablet, these are words which will have been approved by the
company of the gods, among the male gods, and among the
female gods, among those, namely, of the land of the Hittites,
and by the company of the gods among the male gods and
among the female gods, among those, namely, of the land of
Egypt. They are witnesses for me (to the validity) of these
words, (which they have allowed.
</p>

<p>
This is the catalogue of the gods of the land of the
Hittites:&mdash;
</p>

<lg>
<l>(Sutekh of the city of) Tunep,</l>
<l>Sutekh of the land of the Hittites,</l>
<l>Sutekh of the city of Arnema,</l>
<l>Sutekh of the city Zaranda [<hi rend='italic'>or</hi> Ta-Orontes],</l>
<l>Sutekh of the city of Pilka [<hi rend='italic'>or</hi> Pairaka],</l>
<l>Sutekh of the city of Khisasap,</l>
<l>Sutekh of the city of Sarsu,</l>
<l>Sutekh of the city of Aleppo,</l>
<l>Sutekh of the city of...,</l>
<l>(Sutekh of the city of...),</l>
<l>Sutekh of the city of Sarpina,</l>
<l>Astartha [<hi rend='italic'>or</hi> Antarata] of the land of the Hittites,</l>
<l>The god of the land of Zaiath-khirri,</l>
<l>The god of the land of Ka...,</l>
<l>The god of the land of Kher...,</l>
<l>The goddess of the city of Akh...,</l>
<pb n='168'/><anchor id='Pg168'/>
<l>(The goddess of the city of....) and of the land of A ... ua,</l>
<l>The goddess of the land of Zaina,</l>
<l>The god of the land of ... nath ... er.</l>
</lg>

<p>
(I have invoked these male and these) female (gods of the
land of the Hittites, these are the gods) of the land, as
(witnesses to) my oath. (With them have been associated the
male and the female gods) of the mountains, and of the rivers
of the land of the Hittites, the gods of the land of Kazawatana.
Amun, Ra, Sutekh, and the male and female gods of the land
of Egypt, of the earth, of the sea, of the winds, and of the
storms.
</p>

<p>
With regard to the commandment which the silver tablet
contains for the people of the Hittites and for the people of
Egypt, he who shall not observe it shall be given over (to the
vengeance) of the company of the gods of the Hittites, and
shall be given over (to the vengeance of the) company of the
gods of Egypt, (he) and his house and his servants.
</p>

<p>
But he who shall observe these commandments, which the
silver tablet contains, whether he be of the people of the
Hittites or (of the people of the Egyptians), because he has
not neglected them, the company of the gods of the land of
the Hittites and the company of the gods of the land of Egypt
shall secure his reward and preserve life (for him) and his
servants, and those who are with him and who are with his
servants.
</p>

<p>
If there flee away of the inhabitants (one from the land of
Egypt), or two or three, and they betake themselves to the
great king of the Hittites, (the great king of the Hittites shall
not) allow them (to remain, but he shall) deliver them up, and
send them back to Ramessu Mi-Amun, the great prince of Egypt.
</p>

<pb n='169'/><anchor id='Pg169'/>

<p>
Now with regard to the (inhabitant of the land of Egypt),
who is delivered up to Ramessu Mi-Amun, the great prince of
Egypt, his fault shall not be avenged upon him, his (house)
shall not be taken away, nor his (wife), nor his (children).
There shall not be (put to death his mother, neither shall he be
punished in his eyes, nor in his mouth, nor on the soles of his
feet), so that thus no crime shall be brought forward against
him.
</p>

<p>
In the same way shall it be done, if inhabitants of the land
of the Hittites take to flight, be it one alone, or two or three,
to betake themselves to Ramessu Mi-Amun, the great prince of
Egypt; Ramessu Mi-Amun, the great prince of Egypt, shall
cause them to be seized, and they shall be delivered up to the
great king of the Hittites.
</p>

<p>
(With regard to) him who (is delivered up, his crime shall not
be brought forward against him). His (house) shall not be
taken away, nor his wives nor his children, nor his people; his
mother shall not be put to death, he shall not be punished in
his eyes, nor on his mouth, nor on the soles of his feet, nor
shall any accusation be brought forward against him.
</p>

<p>
That which is in the middle of this silver tablet and on its
front side is a likeness of the god Sutekh ... surrounded
by an inscription to this effect: <q>This is the (picture) of the
god Sutekh, the king of heaven and (earth).</q> At the time
(?) of the treaty which the great king of the Hittites, Khita-sir
made....
</p>

</div>

<pb n='171'/><anchor id='Pg171'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Appendix II.</head>

<p>
Translation of a cylinder of Nabonidos, king of Babylonia,
containing the name of Belshazzar. The cylinder is one of
four, each containing the same text and buried at the four
corners of the temple of Sin, the Moon-god, at Mugheir or Ur.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Col. I.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<q>Nabonidos, the king of Babylon, the beautifier of Bit-Saggil
and Bit-Zida, the worshipper of the great gods, am I. The
temple of the king who provides plenty (Sin), the tower of the
temple of Gis-nu-gal,<note place='foot'><q>The wood of the great
prince.</q></note> which is within Ur, which Lig-Bagas, an
ancient king, had made but did not finish, Dungi, his son,
completed its work. I looked into the cylinders of Lig-Bagas
and Dungi his son, and (read) how Lig-Bagas had made this
tower but did not finish it, and how Dungi his son completed
its work. Subsequently this tower became old, and accordingly
above the old platform which Lig-Bagas and Dungi his
son had made I built the walls<note place='foot'>Literally,
<q>I took the framework.</q></note> of this tower, as of old, with
cement and brick, and I founded and erected them for Sin, the
lord of the gods of heaven and earth, the king of the gods, even
the gods of gods, who inhabit heaven, the great ones, the lord
of the temple of Gis-nu-gal within Ur, my lord.</q>
</p>

<pb n='172'/><anchor id='Pg172'/>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Col. II.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<q>O Sin, lord of the gods, king of the gods of heaven and
earth, even the gods of gods, who inhabit heaven, the great
ones, for this temple, with joy at thy entrance, may thy lips
establish the blessings of Bit-Saggil, Bit-Zida, and Bit-Gis-nu-gal,
the temples of thy great divinity; set the fear of thy great
divinity in the hearts of his (<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, Nabonidos') men that they err
not; for thy great divinity may their foundations remain firm
like the heavens. As for me, Nabonidos, the king of Babylon,
preserve me from sinning against thy great divinity, and grant
me the gift of a life of long days; and plant in the heart of
Bilu-sarra-utsur (Belshazzar), the eldest son, the offspring of my
heart, reverence for thy great divinity, and never may he incline
to sin; with fulness of life may he be satisfied.</q>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='173'/><anchor id='Pg173'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Index.</head>

<lg>
<l>Abraham, origin of word, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>birthplace of, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>campaign of, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Egypt, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Accadian account of the Deluge, <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>translation of, <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Accadian Olympos, <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Accadians, the, <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Achæmenian inscriptions, <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Adam, origin of word, <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ahab, date of death of, <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alphabet, origin of, <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aram, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ararat, <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arpad, fall of, <ref target='Pg108'>108</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arphaxad, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Asshur, or Assur, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Assur-bani-pal, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Assyrian king, the last, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Assyrian prayers, <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Assyrian texts of inscriptions, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Assyrians, rites of, <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Babel, Tower of, <ref target='Pg037'>37</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Babylon, description of, <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rebuilt by Esar-haddon, <ref target='Pg129'>129</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Babylonian empire, rise of, <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Babylonian gem, <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Babylonian king, the last, <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Babylonian libraries, <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Babylonian psalm, <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Babylonian Sabbath, <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Babylonians, rites of, <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bel, prayer to, <ref target='Pg068'>68</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='174'/><anchor id='Pg174'/>

<lg>
<l>Canaan, <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carchemish, battle of, <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chaldæan account of the Deluge, <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>translation of, <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chaldæans, meaning of the word, <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chedor-laomer, campaign of, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cherub, origin of word, <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chronological tables, <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref>, <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Circumcision, rite of, <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Creation, legend of the, <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>translation of, <ref target='Pg023'>23</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cuneiform inscriptions, decipherment of, <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Grotefend's guess, <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>studies of Lassen and Rawlinson, <ref target='Pg012'>12</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>discoveries of Layard, <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Smith and Rassam, <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>hieroglyphic origin of, <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cush, <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cyprus, names of, <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cyrus, empire of, <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not a Persian, <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cylinder of, <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a polytheist, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not King of Persia, <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>language of, <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Damascus, capture of, <ref target='Pg107'>107</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>overthrow of, <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Darius, <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Deluge, Accadian account of, <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Egypt during sojourn of Israelites, <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Egypt, the burden of, <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Egyptian traditions, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Elam, <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Esar-haddon, <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Evil-Merodach, <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Exodus, the, time of, <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref>; stages of, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fall of man, Babylonian account of, <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Genesis, Book of, confirmations of, <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the creation, <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Sabbath, <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the fall of man, <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the site of Paradise, <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Deluge, <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>monotheism of, <ref target='Pg034'>34</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>site of Ararat, <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Tower of Babel, <ref target='Pg037'>37</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dispersion of mankind, <ref target='Pg038'>38</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Abraham, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Joseph, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gisdhubar, adventures of, <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gomer, <ref target='Pg039'>39</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Goshen, land of, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grotefend, guess of, as to decipherment of inscriptions, <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ham, <ref target='Pg038'>38</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hamath, discovery of Hittite inscriptions at, <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Haran, site of, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='175'/><anchor id='Pg175'/>

<lg>
<l>Hazael, contest of, with Shalmaneser, <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hebrew inscriptions, <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hezekiah, illness of, <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>deliverance of, <ref target='Pg126'>126</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>library of, <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hiddekhel, origin of word, <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hittite inscriptions, discovery of, <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hittites, empire of, discovery of, <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cities of, <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>origin of, <ref target='Pg096'>96</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dress of, <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>art of, <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hyksos, the, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Istar, descent of, into Hades, <ref target='Pg152'>152</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Japhet, <ref target='Pg038'>38</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Javan, <ref target='Pg039'>39</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jehovah, origin of the word, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jerusalem, capture of, by Shishak, <ref target='Pg100'>100</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>capture of, by Sargon, <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jerusalem, underground, <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Joseph in Egypt, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Josiah, <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kadesh, <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kirjath-sepher, <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Klein, Dr., discovers Moabite Stone, <ref target='Pg076'>76</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lassen's studies of inscriptions, <ref target='Pg012'>12</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lud, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Madai, <ref target='Pg039'>39</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Media, <ref target='Pg136'>136</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Merodach, the god who raises the dead to life, <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Merodach-baladan, wars of, <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mizraim, <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moab, language of, <ref target='Pg079'>79</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moabite Stone, the, discovery of <ref target='Pg076'>76</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>translation of inscription, <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>language of, <ref target='Pg079'>79</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>forms of the letters, <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Months, names given to, <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moses, origin of the word, <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nabonidos, inscription concerning, <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Naville, M., discovery of, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nebuchadrezzar, <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>wars of, <ref target='Pg139'>139</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>inscription of, <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nimrod, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nineveh, fall of, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nizir, land of, <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='176'/><anchor id='Pg176'/>

<lg>
<l>Omri, tribute of, <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Palestine, early travels in, <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Paradise, site of, <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pharaoh, origin of word, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pharaoh Necho, <ref target='Pg136'>136</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Phœnician ritual, <ref target='Pg068'>68</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Phut, <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pishon, origin of word, <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pithom, site of, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pool of Siloam, site of, <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>recent discoveries at, <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ramses, sites of, <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rawlinson's studies of inscriptions, <ref target='Pg012'>12</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rimmon, <ref target='Pg104'>104</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rimmon-nirari, conquests of, <ref target='Pg107'>107</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rowandiz, <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sabbath, Babylonian, <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Samaria, capture of, <ref target='Pg113'>113</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>re-settlement of, <ref target='Pg114'>114</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sarah, origin of word, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sargon, wars of, <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>capture of Jerusalem by, <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>death of, <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scythians, the, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sennacherib, wars of, <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>inscription of, <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>bas-relief of, <ref target='Pg124'>124</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Lachish, <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>defeat of, <ref target='Pg126'>126</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>murder of, <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shalmaneser II, campaigns of, <ref target='Pg101'>101</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>inscription of, <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>conquers Hazael, <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>erects his own image, <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>obelisk of, <ref target='Pg106'>106</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shem, <ref target='Pg038'>38</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shishak, capture of Jerusalem by, <ref target='Pg100'>100</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Siloam inscription, discovery of, <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>site of, <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>translation of, <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>language of, <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>date of, <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sisuthros, adventures of, <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>translation of legend concerning, <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>meaning of the name, <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sumirians, the, <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tariff of Sacrifices, translation of, <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tiglath-Pileser, campaigns of, <ref target='Pg108'>108</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>death of, <ref target='Pg112'>112</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Two Brothers, Tale of the, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ur, site of, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref>.</l>
</lg>

</div>

</body>
<back rend="page-break-before: right">
  <div id="footnotes">
    <index index="toc" />
    <index index="pdf" />
    <head>Footnotes</head>
    <divGen type="footnotes"/>
  </div>
  <div rend="page-break-before: right">
    <divGen type="pgfooter" />
  </div>
</back>
</text>
</TEI.2>
